 Arjuna said Those who remain with faith, but neglecting the scriptural injunction, - what is their state ? Is it Sattva, Rajas or Tamas ? O Krsna !
 The Bhagavat said The faith of the embodied persons is born of their nature and is of three kinds [viz৷৷] that which is made of the Sattva ; that which is made of the Rajas ; and that which is made of the Tamas. Listen about them.
 Corresponding to one's own sattva everybody has faith, O descendant of Bharata ! The person predominantly consists of the faith. What one has faith in, that he is (becomes) certainly.
 The men of the Sattva (Strand) perform sacrifice intending for the gods ; the men of the Rajas (Strand) do for the spirits and the demons; and the men of the Tamas (Strand) perform sacrifices intending for the imps, the dead, and the ghosts.
 Those men, who practise terrible austerities, not as enjoined in the scriptures; who are bound to hypocricy and conceit, and are endowed with (i.e. impelled by) the force of passion for the desired objects;
 Who emaciate unintelligently the conglamoration of elements in their physic and emaciate Me too, dwelling within the physic-know them to be of a demoniac resolve.
 Further, the food also, which is dear to all, is of three kinds. So are [their] sacrifice, austerity and charity. Listen to this distinction of them.
 The foods that increase life, energy, strength, good health, happiness and satisfaction; and which are delicious, soft, substantial and pleasant to heart (stomach) - they are dear to the men of the Sattva (Strand).
 The foods that are killed by men of the Rajas (Strand) are those which are bitter, sour, saltish, very hot, harsh, dry, and burning; and which cause pain, grief and disease.
 What is old, bereft of taste, ill-smelling, and stale; what is also left after eating, and is impure - such a food is dear to the men of the Tamas (Strand).
 That sacrifice is of the Sattva (Strand), which is offered, as found in the injunction, by men craving for no fruit, by stabilizing their mind with the thought that it is just a thing to be offered.
 What is offered aiming at fruit and also only for the sake of display-know that sacrifice to be of the Rajas (Strand) and to be transitary and impermanent.
 That sacrifice they declare to be of the Tamas (Strand) which is devoid of scriptural injunction, in which there is no [recitation of] Vedic hymns, where no food and [sacrifical] fee are distributed, and which is totally devoid of faith.
 The worship to the gods, to the twice-born, to the elders and to the wise; the purity, the honesty, the state of continence, and the harmlessness-all this is said to be bodily austerity.
 The unoffending speech which is true, and which is pleasant and beneficial; and also the practice of regular recitation of the Vedas - all this is said to be an austerity by the speech-sense.
 The serenity of mind, the ietness, the taciturnity, the self-control, the purity of thought-all this is called mental austerity.
 This three-fold austerity, undertaken (observed) with best faith, by men who are maters of Yoga and have no desire for its fruits-they call it to be of the Sattva.
 The austerity that is practised for gaining respect, honour and reverence and with sheer showing-that is called here [austerity] of the Rajas and it is unstable and impermanent.
 What austerity is practised with foolish obstinacy [and] with self-torture only in order to destroy other person-that is declared to be of the Tamas.
 A gift which is given with the thought that 'One must give' and is given in a proper place, and at correct time to a worthy person, incapable of obliging in return-that gift is held to be of the Sattva.
 But, what is given to get a return of favour or again with a view to a fruit, and which is very much vexed - that gift is held to be of the Rajas.
 The gift which is given, at a wrong place, at a wrong time and to unworthy persons; and which is converted into a bad act and is disrespected - that is declared to be of the Tamas.
 OM TAT SAT : This is held to be the three-fold indication of the Brahman. By means of that, the Vedas, and also the sacrifices had been fashioned formerly by Brahma.
 Therefore, the scripture-prescribed acts of sacrifice, gift and austerity of those who are habituated to have Brahman-discourses, commence (or take place) invariably, with the utterance of OM.
 With [the utterance of] TAT and without aiming at the fruit, the acts of sacrifice and austerity and the various acts of gifts are performed by those who seek emancipation.
 In the sense of 'right one' (or 'manifesting as being') and in the sense of 'proper one' (or 'manifesting perfectly'), this word SAT is employed. Likewise the word SAT is used with regard to the praiseworthy act; O son of Prtha !
 The steadfastness is performing sacrifice, in austerity and in giving gift is also called SAT; and also the act for such purpose is [hence] just called SAT.
 Without faith, whatever oblation is offered, what-ever gift is made, whatever austerity is practised, and whatever action is undertaken, that is called ASAT and it is of no avail after one's death and in this world.
