 Arjuna said O Mighty-armed ! I desire to know severally the distinctive nature of renunciation and of relinishment, O Hrsikesa ! O Slayer of Kesin !
 The Bhagavat said The seers understand the act of renouncing the desire-motivated actions as renunciation; the experts declare the relinishment of the fruits of all actions to be relinishment.
 Certain wise men delcare that the harmful action is to be relinished while others say that the actions of performing sacrifices, giving gifts and observing austerities should not be relinished.
 O best of Bharata's descendants ! Listen to My considered view about relinishing : Indeed the act of relinishing is rightly spoken to be three-fold, O best among men !
 The actions of [Vedic] sacrifice, gift and austerity should not be relinished and they must necessarily be performed; for the men of wisdom the [Vedic sacrifice, gift and also austerity are the means of purification.
 Even these actions too must be performed by relinishing attachment and fruits : This is my considered best opinion, O son of Prtha !
 The renunciation of the enjoined action does not stand to reason; and completely relinishing it, out of ignorance is proclaimed, on all sides, as an act of the Tamas (Strand).
 He who would, out of fear of bodily exertion, relinish an action, just because it is painful-that person, having [thus] made relinishment, an act of the Rajas (Strand), would not at all gain the fruit of [that] relinishment.
 'This is a thing to be performed.'-just on that ground whatever usual action is performed relinishing attachment and also fruit-that act of relinishment is deemed to be of the Sattva (Strand).
 The man of relinishment, who is well possessed of the Sattva, is wise and has his doubts destroyed-he hates not the unskilled action and clings not to the skilled action.
 Indeed, to relinish actions entirely is not possible for a body-bearing one; but whosoever relinishes the fruits of actions, he is said to be a man of [true] relinishment.
 The three-fold fruit of action, viz., the undesired, the desired and the mixed, accrues [even] after death ot those who are not men of relinishment, but never to those who are men of renunciation.
 O mighty-armed one ! Learn from Me these following five causes that have been declared in the conclusion of deliberations [on proper knowledge], for the accomplishment of all actions.
 The basis, as well as the agent, and diverse instruments, and distinct activity of various kinds and Destiny, which is certainly the fifth [factor].
 O Arjuna ! Whatever action is undertaken with the body, speech or the mind, whether it is lawful or otherwise, its factors are these five.
 But this being the case, whosoever views himself as the sole agent (cause of actions) due to his imperfect intellect - he, the defective-minded one, does not view [things rightly].
 He, whose mental disposition is not dominated by the sense 'I', and whose intellect is not stained - he, even if he slays these worlds, does not [really] slay any and he is not fettered.
 The instrument of knowledge, the object-of-knowledge, and the knowing subject-the prompting-in-action, consisting of these three-fold elements is [itself] the proper grasping of action with three-fold elements viz., the instrument, the object and the agent.
 The instrument of knowledge, the object and the agent are just three kinds because of the differences in the Strands-thus it is declared in enumerating the Strands. These also you must listen to [from Me] as they are.
 That instrument-of-knowledge, by means of which one perceives in all beings the singular immutable Existence, the Unclassified in the classified ones - that you must know to be born of the Sattva (Strand).
 That instrument-of-knowledge, by means of which one considers the varied natures of different sorts in all beings as [really] different-that is regarded to be of the Rajas (Strand).
 That [instrument-of-knowledge], because of which, one, not realising the whole, gets indulged, without reason, in a particular activity, and which is unconcerned with the real nature of things and is insignificant - that is declared to be of the Tamas (Strand).
 The object that has been acired with determination, without attachment and without desire or hatred, by one who does not crave to reap the fruit [of his action] - that is declared to be of the Sattva (Strand).
 The object which is abundant in afflictions; and which is further reired by one who craves to attain the desired thing with the feeling of 'I'-that is considered to be of the Rajas (Strand).
 The object which is gained, due to ignorance, without considering the result, the loss, the injury to others and the strength [of one's own]-that is declared to be of the Tamas (Strand).
 The agent who is free from attachment; who does not make any speech of egoism; who is full of contentment and enthusiasm; and who does not change [mentally] in success or in failure-that agent is said to be of the Sattva (Strand) nature.
 The agent, who is a man of passion; who craves for the fruit of his action, and is avaricious; who is injurious by nature, is impure and is overpowered by joy and griefthat agent is proclaimed to be of the Rajas (Strand).
 The agent, who does not exert, is vulgar, obstinate and deceitful; who is a man of wickedness and is lazy, sorrowful, and procrastinating - that agent is said to be of the Tamas (Strand).
 You must listen [from Me] to the three-fold division of the intellect and also of content both being expounded completely and individually, [by Me] basing on the Strands, O Dhananjaya !
 The intellect which knows the activity and the cessation from the activity, the proper and improper actions, the fear and non-fear, and the bondage and emancipation-that intellect is considered to be of the Sattva (Strand).
 The intellect, by means of which one decides incorrectly the righteous and the unrighteous ones and what is a proper action and also an improper onethat intellect is of the Rajas (Strand), O son of Prtha !
 The intellect which, containing darkness (ignorance), conceives the unrighteous one as righteous and all things topsy-turvy-that intellect is deemed to be of the Tamas (Strand).
 The unfailing content because of which one restrains, with Yoga, the activities of mind, the living breath and the senses-that content is considered to be of the Sattva (Strand).
 O Arjuna ! The content by which one restrains one's bounden duty, pleasure and wealth, and conseently desiring the fruits [of action]-that content is of the Rajas (Strand), O son of Prtha !
 The content, whery a foolish man does not give up his sleep, fear, grief, despondency and also arrogancethat content is deemed to be of the Tamas (Strand).
 O best among the Bharatas ! Now from Me you must also listen to the three-fold happiness where one gets delighted by practice, and attains the end of suffering.
 [The happiness] which is like poison at its time but is like nectar at the time of its result-that happiness, born of serenity of the Soul and intellect, you must know to be of the Sattva (Strand).
 [The happiness] which is like nectar at its time due to the contact between the senses and sense-objects; but which is like poison at the time of its result-that is considered to be of the Rajas (Strand).
 The happiness which, [both] at the beginning and subseently, is of the nature of deluding the Self; and which results from sleep, indolence and heedleness-that is stated to be of the Tamas (Strand).
 Whether on the earth, or again among the gods in the heaven, there exists not a single being, which is free from these three Strands, born of the Material-Nature.
 The duties of the Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas, the Vaisyas, and of the Sudras are properly classified according to the Strands which are the sources of their nature, O scorcher of foes !
 Quietude, self-control, as well as purity, for-bearance, and also straightforwardness, knowledge, wisdom, and faith in another world are the duties of the Brahmanas, born of their nature.
 Heroic deed, fiery energy, firmness, dexterity, and also non-feeling form battle, giving gifts, overlordship, are the duties of the Ksatriyas, born of their nature.
 Ploughing, cattle-tending and trading are the actions of the Vaisyas, born of their nature. The action, in the form of service, is of the Sudras, born of their nature.
 A man, devoted to his own respective action, attains success. Devoted to one's own action, how one attains success that you must hear from Me.
 That, whence the activities of the beings arise; by which this universe is pervaded-worshipping That by one's own prescribed action, a man attains success.
 Better is one's own prescribed duties, [born of one's nature, even though] it is devoid of ality, than another's duty well executed; the doer of duty, dependent on (or prescribed according to) one's own nature, does not incur sin.
 O son of Kunti ! One should not give up the nature-born duty, even if it is (appears to be) defective. For, all beginnings are enveloped by harm just as the fire by smoke.
 He, whose mind entertains no attachment to anything, who is self-conered and is free from craving-he attains by means of renunciation the supreme success of actionlessness.
 Having attained the success, how he attains the Brahman, an attainment which is confirmed to be the final beatitude of true knowledge-that you must learn from Me briefly.
 He, who has got a totally pure intellect by fully controlling his self (mind) with firmness, and renouncing sense-objects, sound etc., and driving out desire and hatred;
 Who enjoys solitude, eats lightly, has controlled his speech-organ, body and mind; who is permanently devoted to the meditation-Yoga; and who has taken shelter in the perennial desirelessness;
 Relinshing egotism, violence, pride, desire, wrath, and the sense of possession-he, the unselfish and calm one, is capable of becoming the Brahman.
 Having become the Brahman, the serene-minded one neither grieves nor rejoices; remaining eal to all beings, he gains the highest devotion to Me.
 Through devotion he comes to know of Me : Who I am and how, in fact, I am-having correctly known Me, he enters Me. Then afterwards,
 Performing all [his] actions all the time and taking refuge in Me, he attains, through My Grace, the eternal, changeless state.
 [Hence] renouncing by mind all actions in Me, O descendant of Bharata, and taking hold of the knowledge-Yoga, you must always be with your thought-organ [turned] towards Me.
 Having your thought-organ turned towards Me, you shall pass over all obstacles by Me Grace. On the other hand, if you don't give up your sense of ego, you will not liberated yourself, [instead] you will perish.
 In case, holding fast to the sense of ego, you think (decide)  'I shall not fight', that resolve of yours will be just useless. [For] your own natural condition will incite you [to fight].
 O son of Kunti ! Being bound fully by your own duty, born of your own nature, and also being [hence] not independent, you would perform what you do not wish to perform, because of your-delusion.
 O Arjuna ! This Lord dwells in the heart of all beings, causing, by His trick-of-Illusion, all beings to whirl round [as if they are] mounted on a [revolving] mechanical contrivance.
 To Him alone you must go for refuge with all your thought, O descendant of Bharata ! Through My Grace you will attain the success, the eternal abode.
 Thus the [path of] wisdom, a better secret than all the secrets has been expounded to you by Me; comprehend it fully and then act as you please.
 Yet again, you must listen to My ultimate (or supreme) message which is the highest secret of all. You are My dear one and have a firm intellect. Hence I shall tell you what is good to you :
 Be with your mind fixed in Me; be My devotee; offer oblation to Me and render salutation to Me; you shall come to Me alone. Really I promise you, (because) you are dear to Me.
 Abandoning all attributes, come to Me as your sole refuge; I shall rescue you from all sins; don't be sorrowful.
 This [knowledge] is for you, and it should never be imparted to one who does not observe austerities; to him who has no devotion; to him who has no desire to listen; and to him who is indignant towards Me.
 Whosoever shall declare this highest secret to My devotees, he, cultivating an utmost devotion towards Me, and not entertaining any doubt, shall reach Me.
 And, excepting him there would be none among men who is the best performer of what is dear to Me; and other than him there shall be none else who is dearer to Me on earth.
 Whosoever would learn this sacred dialogue of both of us, by him I am worshipped (delighted) through the knowledge-sacrifice : This is My opinion
 A man who would at least hear to [this] with faith and without indignation-he too, freed [from sins], will attain the auspicious worlds of men of meritorius acts.
 O son of Prtha ! Has this been heared by you with attentive mind ? O Dhananjaya ! Has your strong delusion, born of ignorance, been totally destroyed ?
 Arjuna said My delusion is destroyed; recollection is gained by me through your Grace, O Acyuta ! I stand firm, free of doubts; I shall excute your ?nd.
 Sanjaya said Thus I have heard this wonderful and thrilling dailogue of Vasudeva and the mighty-minded son of Prtha.
 Through the grace of Vyasa, I have heard this highly secret supreme Yoga from Krsna, the Lord of the Yogins, while He was Himself imparting it personally.
 O king ! By recollecting and recollecting this wonderful pious dialogue of Kesava and Arjuna, I feel also delighted again and again.
 O great king ! On recalling in the mind that extremely wonderful supreme form of Hari, I am amazed and I feel joyous again and again.
 Where Krsna, the Lord of Yogins remains, where the son of Prtha holds his bow, there lie fortune, victory, prosperity and firm justice-so I believe.
