 Arjuna said My delusion has completely gone thanks to the great and mysterious discourse which is termed as a science governing the Soul and which You have delivered by way of favouring me.
 The origin and the dissolution of beings have been listened to in detail by me from You, O Lotus-eyed One, and also to [Your] inexhaustible greatness.
 As You describe Yourself as the Supreme Lord [of all], it must be so. [Hence], O Supreme Self, I desire to perceive Your Lordly form.
 O Master ! If you think that it is possible for me to see that form, then, O Lord of the Yogins, please show me Your Immortal Self.
 The Bhagavat said Behold, O son of Prtha, My divine forms in hundreds and in thousands and of varied nature and of varied colours and varied shapes.
 Behold the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the twin Asvins, and the Maruts; O son of Pandu, behold also many wonders that had never been seen before.
 Now, behold the entire universe, including the moving and the unmoving, and whatsoever else you desire to see-all established in one here, in My body, O Gudakesa (Arjuna) !
 But, you cannot see Me simply with this eye of yours [Hence], I give you the divine eye. [Now] behold the Lordly form of  Mine.
 Sanjaya said O king ! Having thus stated, Hari (Krsna), the mighty Lord of the Yogins, showed to the son of Prtha [His own] Supreme Lordly form;
 That has many mouths and eyes, many wondrous sights, many heavenly ornaments, and many heavenly weapons held ready;
 That wears heavenly garlands and garments; has the unguent of heavenly sandal paste; it is all wonderful, shining (or godly), infinite; and it has faces in all directions.
 If the splendour of a thousand suns were to burst forth at once in the sky, would that be eal to the splendour of that Mighty Self ?
 At that time the son of Pandu beheld there in the body of the God-of-gods, the entire universe, united in one and [yet] divided into many groups.
 Then, possessed by amazement and with his bodily hair thrilled, Dhananjaya (Arjuna) with his head bowed to the God and with folded palms spoke [to Him].
 Arjuna said O God ! In Your body I behold all gods and also hosts of different kinds of beings-the Lord Brahma seated on the lotus-seat; and all the seers and all the glowing serpents.
 I behold You of many arms, bellies, mouths and eyes and of infinite forms on all sides; of You, I find neither the end, nor the centre, nor the beginnng too, O Lord of the universe, O Universal-formed One !
 I behold You as having crowns, clubs and discs; as a mass of radiance, shining on all sides, hard to look at and on each side blazing like burning fire and the sun; and as an immeasurable one.
 You are the imperishable, the Supreme Being to be known; You are the ultimate place of rest for this universe; You are changeless and the guardian of the pious act of the Satvatas; You are the everlasting Soul, I believe.
 I observe You having to beginning, no middle and no end; having infinite creative power, and infinite arms; as havig the moon and the sun for Your eyes, and the blazing fire for Your mouth; [and] as acorching this universe with Your rediance.
 This space in between the heaven and the earth as well as all the directions are pervaded singly by You; seeing this wondrous form of Yours as such, O Exalted Soul, the triple world is very much frightened.
 These hosts of gods enter into You; some frightened ones recite [hymns] with folded palms; simply crying 'Hail !', the hosts of great seers praise You with the excellent praising hymns.
 The Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Visvas (Visvadevas), the twin Asvins and the Maruts, and the Steam-drinkers (Manes) and the hosts of the Gandharvas, the Yoksas, the demons and the perfected ones - all gaze on You and are ite amazed.
 O Mighty-armed One ! Having seen Your mighty form that has many faces and eyes, many arms, thighs and feet, and many bellies, and is terrible with many tusks; the worlds are frightened and so also myself.
 As I observe You [with form] touching the sky; blazing; having many colours, mouths wide open, eyes blazing and large; I am terrified in my inner soul (mind); and I do not get courage and peace, O Visnu !
 By merely seeing Your faces that are frightening with tusks and are looking like the fire of destruction, I do not know the arters and get no peace.  Have mercy, O Lord of gods ! O Abode of the Universe !
 All these sons of Dhrtarastra along with the entire hosts of kings, this Bhisma, this Drona and this son of the charioteer (Karna), together with the chief warriors of ours too;
 They enter, hastening, into Your terrible mouths, frightening with tusks; some [of them], sticking in between Your teeth, are clearly visible with their heads powered.
 Just as many water-rapids of the rivers race heading towards the ocean alone, in the same manner these heroes of the world of men do enter into Your mouths flaming all around.
 Just as with full speed, the moths enter into the flaming fire for their own destruction, in the same manner the worlds also do enter, for their own destruction with full speed, into the mouths of Yours.
 Devouring, on all sides with Your blazing mouths, the entire worlds, You are licking up; Your terrible rays scroch the entire universe filling it with their radiance, O Visnu !
 Please, tell me who You are with a terrible form; O the Best of gods ! Salutation to You, please be merciful. I am desirious of knowing You, the Primal One in detail; for I do not clearly comprehend Your behaviour.
 The Bhagavat said I am the Time, the world-destroyer, engaged here in withdrawing the worlds that are overgrown; even without you (your fighting) all the warriors, standing in the rival armies, would cease to be.
 Therefore, stand up, win glory, and vanishing foes, enjoy the rich kingdom; these [foes] have already been killed by Myself; [hence] be a mere token cause [in their destruction], O ambidextrous archer !
 Slay Drona and Bhisma, and Jayadratha, and Karna as well as the other heroes of the world-all already slain by Me. Do not get distressed; fight; you shall vanish enemies in the battle.
 Sanjaya said On hearing this speach of Kesava, the crowned-prince (Arjuna) had his palms folded; and trembling he protstrated himself to Krsna; and stammering, and being very much afraid and bowing down, he spoke to Him again.
 Arjuna said O Lord of sense-organs (Krsna) ! It is appropriate that the universe rejoices and feels exceedingly delighted by the high glory of yours; that in fear the demons fly on all directions; and that the hosts of the perfected ones bow down [to You].
 O Mighty One ! Why should they not bow down to You, the Primal Creater, Who are greater than even Brahma (personal god) ? O Endless One, O Lord of gods, O Abode of the universe ! You are unalterable, existent, non-existent and also that which is beyond both.
 You are the Primal God; You are the Ancient Soul; You are the transcending place of rest for this universe; You are the knower and the knowable; You are the Highest Abode; and the universe with its infinite forms is pervaded by You.
 You are Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, the Moon, Prajapati and the Great-paternal-grand-father; Salutation and salutation thousand times to You; and again also more salutation and salutation to You.
 Salutation to You in the front and behind; salutation to You, just on all sides, O One Who are All ! You are of infinite might and of immeasurable powers; and You pervade all and hence You are all.
 Taking You for a [mere] companion, not knowing this greatness of Yours, and out of my carelessness or through even affection, whatever I have importunately called You as O Krsna, O Yadava, O Comrade; and,
 Whatever disrespect was shown by me to You, to make fun of You in the course of play, or while on the bed, or on the seat, or at meals, either alone, or in the presence of repectable persons - for that I beg pardon of You, the Unconceivable One, O Acyuta !
 You are the father of the world of the moving and unmoving; You are the great preceptor of this universe; in the triad of worlds there is no one eal to You-How can there be anyone else superior ? - having greatness not comprehended.
 Hence, paying homage, and prostrating may body, I solicit grace of You, the Lord praisworthy. O God ! Be pleased to bear with me, just as a beloved father with his beloved son and just as a dear friend with his dear friend.
 I am thrilled by seeing what has not been seen earlier; and my mind is very much distressed with fear; show me the same (usual) form of Yours; kindly be appeased O God ! Lord of gods ! O Abode of the worlds !
 I desire to see You in the same manner, wearing crown, holding the club and the discuss in hand; please be with the same form having four hands, O Thousand-armed One ! O Universal Form !
 The Bhagavat said Being gracious towards you, I have shown you, O Arjuna, this supreme form, as a result of [Your] concentration on the Self; this form of Mine full of splendour universal , unending and primal, has been never seen before by anybody other than your-self.
 Not by the knowledge of the Vedas and sacrifices, nor by making gifts, nor by the rituals, nor by severe austerities, can I be seen in this form in the world of men, by anybody other than yourself, O the great hero of the Kurus !
 Let there be no distress and no bewilderment in you by seeing this terrific and violent form of Mine; being free from fear, cheerful at heart, behold again this form of Mine which is the same [as before].
 Having said to Arjuna as above, Vasudeva revealed His own tiny form; assuming His gentle body once again, the Mighty Soul (Krsna) consoled the frightened Arjuna.
 Arjuna said On seeing this gentle human form of Yours, O Janardana, now I have regained my nature and have now collected my thinking faculty.
 The Bhagavat said This form of Mine, which you have just observed is extremely difficult to observe; even gods are always curious of observing this form.
 Neither by reciting Vedas, no by obseving austerity, nor by offering gifts, nor by performing sacrifice, can I be observed in this manner as you have see Me now.
 But, through an undeviating devotion, it is possible to know, and to observe and also to enter into Me as such, O Arjuna ! O scorcher of foes !
 He, who performs actions for [attaining] Me; who regards Me as his supreme goal; who is devoted to Me; who is free from attachment; and who is free from hatred towards all beings-he attains me, O son of Pandu !
