 The Bhagavat said O mighty-armed [Arjuna] ! Yet, again listen to My best message, which, with good intention, I shall declare to you, who are dear to Me.
 Neither the hosts of gods, nor the great seers know My origin. For, I am the first, in every respect, among the gods and great seers.
 Whosoever knows Me as the unborn and beginningless Absolute Lord of the universe, that person, not deluded among the mortals, is delivered from all sins.
 Intellect, knowledge, steadiness, patience, truth, control [over sense-organs], tranility [of mind], pleasure, pain, birth, death, fear and courage;
 [Also] non-injury, eanimity, contentment, austerity, charity, repute and ill-repute - all these diverse dispositions of beings emanate from none but Me.
 The ancient Seven Great-Seers and also the Four Manus, of whom these creatures in this world are offsprings-they have been born as My mental dispositions.
 He, who knows correctly this extensively manifesting power and the Yogic power of Mine-he is endowed with the unwavering Yoga. There is no doubt about it.
 'He is the source of all and from Him all comes forth' - Thus viewing, the wise men revere Me with devotion.
 Having their mind fixed on Me, their life gone into Me, enlightening each other, and constantly talking of Me, they are pleased and are delighted.
 To these persons, who are [thus] mingling [with Me] and revere [Me] with love, I grant that knowledge-Yoga by means of which they reach Me.
 Out of compassion only towards these men, I, who remain as their very Self, destroy with teh shining light of wisdom, their darkness born of ignorance,
 - 10.13. Arjuna said You are the Supreme Brahman, Supreme Abode, Supreme Purifier. All the seers and also the divine seer Narada, Asita Devala, Vyasa describe You as the Eternal Divine Soul, the unborn, all-manifesting First-God. You too say so to me.
10.12. -  Arjuna said You are the Supreme Brahman, Supreme Abode, Supreme Purifier. All the seers and also the divine seer Narada, Asita Devala, Vyasa describe You as the Eternal Divine Soul, the unborn, all-manifesting First-God. You too say so to me.
 What You tell me, I take all to be true, O Kesava ! For, O Bhagavat, neither the gods nor the great seers know Your manifestation.
 Only Yourself know Yourself by Yourself, O Supreme Purusa, Creator of all beings, Lord of beings, God of gods, Lord of the Universe !
 You are [alone] capable of fully declaring the auspicious manifesting powers of Yours, by which manifesting power You remain pervading these worlds.
 O Mighty Yogin ! How should I know You, meditating on You ? In what several entities, O Bhagavat, are You to be contemplated upon by me ?
 In detail, please expound, once again Your own Yogic power and the manifesting power. O Janardana ! I don't feel contended in hearing Your nectar-[like exposition].
 The Bhagavat said Yes. O the best among the Kurus ! I shall expound to you, only the chief auspicious manifesting powers of Mine. For, there would be no end to My details.
 O coneror of sleep ! I am the Soul residing in the heart of all beings; I am the beginning, and the middle and also the very end of beings.
 Of the sons of Aditi, I am Visnu; of the luminaries, the radiant Sun; of the Maruts, I am Marici; of the stars, I am the Moon.
 Of the Vedas, I am the Samaveda; of the gods, I am Vasava (Indra); of the sense-organs, I am the mind; of the beings, I am the sentience.
 And of the Rudras, I am Sankara; of the Yaksas and the Raksas, [I am] the Lord-of-Wealth (Kubera); of the Vasus, I am the Fire-god; of the mountains, I am the Meru.
 Of the royal priests I am the chief viz., Brhaspati (the priest of gods), O son of Prtha, you should know that; of the army-generals, I am Skanda [the War-god]; of the water reservoirs, I am the ocean.
 Of the great seers, I am Bhrgu; of the words, I am the Single-syllable (Om); of the sacrifices [performed with external objects], I am the sacrifice of muttering prayer; of the immovables, I am the Himalayan range.
 Of all trees, I am the Pipal-tree; and of the divine seers, Narada; of the Gandharvas (the celestial musicians), Citraratha; of the perfected ones, the sage Kapila.
 Of the horses, you should know Me to be the nectar-born Uccaihsravas (Indra's horse); of the best elephants, the Airavata (Indra's elephant); and of the men, their king.
 Of the weapons, I am the Vajra [of Indra]; of the cows, I am the Wish-fullfilling Cow [of the heaven]; of the progenitors, I am Kandarpa (the god-of-love); of the serpents, I am Vasuki.
 Of the snakes, I am Ananta; of the water-beings (water-deities), I am varuna; of the manes, I am Aryaman; of the controllers, I am Yama (the Death-god).
 No such translation is available for this sloka.
 Of the progenies of Diti (the demons), I am Prahlada; of the measuring ones, I am the shark; of rivers, I am the daughter of Jahnu (the Ganga).
 Of the creations, I am the beginning, the end and also the middle, O Arjuna ! Of the sciences, [I am] the science of the Self; of arguers, I am the argument.
 Of the syllables, I am A; of the compounds, the Dvandva; none but Me, is the immortal Time; I am the dispenser [of fruits actions] facing on all sides.
 I am the Death that carries away all and also the Birth of all that are to be born; of the wives of men, I am the Fame, Fortune, Speech, Memory, Wisdom, Constancy and Patience.
 Likewise, of the modes of singing [of the hymns], I am the Brhatsaman; of the metres, I am the Gayatri; of the months, I am the Margasirsa; of the seasons, I am the season abounding with flowers.
 I am gambling of the fradulent; I am the brilliance of the brilliant; I am the victory; I am the resolution; I am the energy of the energetic.
 Of the Vrsnis (the members of the Vrsni clan), I am the son of Vasudeva; of the sons of Pandu, Dhananjaya (Arjuna) [I am]; of the sages too, I am Vyasa; of the seers, the seer Usanas.
 I am the punishment [at the hands] of the punishers; I am the political wisdom of those who seek victory; I am also silence of the secret ones; I am the knowledge of the knowers.
 Further, O Arjuna, I am that which is the seed of all beings; there is no being, whether moving or non-moving, that could exist without Me.
 O scorcher of foes ! There is no end to My extraordinary manifesting Power. The above details of [My] manifesting power have been declared by Me only by way of examples.
 Whatsoever being exists with the manifesting power, and with beauty and vigour, be sure that it is born only of a bit of My illuminant.
 Or, O Arjuna ! Why this detailed statement ? I remain, pervading this entire universe with a single fraction [of Myself].
