 The Bhagavat said This changeless Yoga I had properly taught thus to Vivasvat; Vivasvat correctly told it ot Manu; and Manu declared to Iksvaku.
 Thus the regal sages knew this, received in regualr succession. By the passage of long time, this Yoga has been however lost, O scorcher of enemies !
 The self-same ancient Yoga has been taught now by Me to you on the ground that you are My devotee and friend too. This is the highest secret.
 Arjuna said Your birth is later, [while] the birth of Vivasvat is earlier; how am then to understand that You had properly taught [him this] in the beginnig ?
 The Bhagavat said O Arjuna, many births of Mine, as well as of yours have passed. All of them I do know, but you do not, O scorcher of foes !
 Though [I am] unborn and the changeless Self; though I am the the Lord of [all] beings; yet presiding over My own nature I take birth by My own Trick-of-illusion.
 For, whenever there is a decay of righteousness and the rise of unrighteousness, then, O descendant of Bharata, I send forth (or create) that is which the Self is unimportant.
 For the protection of the good people, and for the destruction of evil-doers, and for the purpose of firmly establishing righteousness, I take birth in every age.
 Whosoever knows thus correctly the divine birth and action of Mine, he, on abandoning the body does not go to rirth, [but] goes to Me, O Arjuna !
 Many persons, who are free from passion, fear and anger; are full of Me; take refuge in Me; and have become pure by the austerity of wisdom-they have come to My being.
 The way in which men resort to Me, in the same way I favour them. O son of Prtha, all sorts of men follow the path of Mine.
 Those, who are desirous of success of their actions, perform sacrifices intending the deities. For, the success born of [ritualistic] actions is ick in the world of men.
 The four-fold caste-structure has been created by Me, according to the division of [their respective] alities and actions. Though I am the creator of this, know Me as a changeless non-creator.
 Actions do not stain Me; nor do I have a desire for the fruits [of actions] also. Whosoever comprehends Me as such, he is not bound by actions.
 Realizing in this fashion, action had been under-taken also by ancient seekers of salvation. Hence, you too should perform, by all means, the more ancient action that had been performed by the ancients.
 Even the wise are perplexed about what is action and what is non-action; I shall preperly teach you the action, by knowing which you shall be freed from evil.
 Something has got to be understand of [good] action also; and something is to be understood of the wrong action; and something is to be understood of non-action. Difficult is to comprehend the way of action.
 He, who finds non-action in the action, and action in the non-action, is an intelligent one, among men and is said to be a performer or destroyer of all actions.
 He, whose every exertion is devoid of intention for the desirable objects, and whose actions are burnt up by the fire of wisdom-him the wise call a man of learning.
 By abandoning attachment for fruits of actions, remaining ever content and depending on nothing, that person, even though he is engaged in action, does not at all perform anything.
 Being rid of cravings, having mind and self (body) all controlled, abandoning all sense of possession, and performing exclusively bodily action, he does not incur any sin.
 Remaining contended wiht the gain brought by chance, transcending the dualities (pairs of opposites), entertaining no jealously, and remaning eal in success and in failure, he does not get bound, even when he acts.
 The action gets dissolved completely in the case of the person who undertakes it for the sake of sacrifice; who is rid of attachment and is freed; and who has his mind fixed in wisdom.
 The Brahman-oblation that is to be offered ot the Brahman, is poured into the Brahman-fire by the Brahman; it is nothing but the Brahman that is to be attained by him whose deep contemplation is the [said] Brahman-action.
 Certain other men of Yoga are completely devoted to yajna, connected with the devas and offer that yajna, simply as a yajna, into the insatiable fire of the Brahman.
 [Yet] others offer the sense-organs like sense-of-hearing and the rest into the fiires of [their] restrainer; others offer the objects like sound and the rest into the fires of the sense-organs.
 Some others offer all actions of their sense-organs and the actions of their life-breath into the fire of Yoga of the self control, set ablaze by wisdom.
 [These] are [respectively] the performs of sacrifices with material objects, the performers of sacrifices with penance, and the performers of sacrifices with Yoga. Likewise [there are] yet other ascetics with rigid vows whose sacrifices are the svadhyaya-knowledge.
 - 4.30. [Some sages] offer the prana into the apana; like-wise others offer the apana into the prana. Having controlled both the courses of the prana and apana, the same sages, with their desire fulfilled by the above activities, and with their food restricted, offer the pranas into pranas. All these persons know what sacrifices are and have their sins destroyed by sacrifices.
4.29. -  [Some sages] offer the prana into the apana; like-wise others offer the apana into the prana. Having controlled both the courses of the prana and apana, the same sages, with their desire fulfilled by the above activities, and with their food restricted, offer the pranas into pranas. All these persons know what sacrifices are and have their sins destroyed by sacrifices.
 The eaters of the sacrifice-ordained (or sacrificial remnant) nectar, attain the eternal Brahman. [Even] this world is not for a non-sacrificer, how can there be the other ? O best of the Kurus !
 Thus, sacrifices of many varieties have been elaborated in the mouth of the Brahman. Know them all as having sprung from actions. By knowing thus you shall be liberated.
 The sacrifice by knowledge is superior to the sacrifice by material. O son of Prtha, scorcher of foes ! All actions, leaving no bit, meet their total end in knowledge.
 This you should learn [from those, endowed with knowledge], by prostration, by iniry and by service [all offered to them]; those who are endowed with knowledge and are capable of showing the truth will give you the truth nearby;
 By knowing which you shall not get deluded once again in this manner, O son of Pandu; and by which means you shall see all beings without exception in [your] Self i.e., in Me.
 Even if you are the highest sinner amongst all sinners, you shall cross over [the ocean of] all the sin just by the boat of knowledge.
 Just as the fire, well inflamed, reduces the fuels to ashes, so also the fire of knowledge reduces all actions to ashes.
 In this world there exists no purifier comparabel to knowledge.  One who becomes perfect in Yoga finds this, on his own accord, in his Self in course of time.
 He, who has faith, gains knowledge, if he is solely intending upon it and has his sense-organs well-controlled; having gained the knowledge, he attains, before long, the Peace Supreme.
 But he, who is ignorant and has no faith, perishes, with his self (mind) full of doubts. Neither this world nor the other, nor happiness is for a person, who is by nature is full of doubts.
 O Dhananjaya ! Actions do not bind him who has renounced [all] actions through Yoga; who has cut off his doubts by the sword of knowledge; and who is a master of his own self.
 Therefore, thus cutting off, by means of knowledge-sword, the doubt that has sprung from ignornace and exists in [your] heart, practise the Yoga ! Stand up ! O descendant of Bharata !
