 The Bhagavat said [The scriptures] speak of a non-perishing holy Fig-tree, which has root that is high (or above) and branches that are low (or below) and of which the [Vedic] hymns are leaves-he who knows this (Tree) is the knower of the Vedas;
 Of which (Tree) the branches, spreading downward and upward, well developed with Strands, have sense objects as sprouts; also below in the human world are Its roots, stretching successively, having actions for their sub-knots.
 The nature of this is not perceived in that manner, nor its end, nor its beginning and nor its centre (the middle). Cutting this holy Fig-tree-with its firmly and variedly grown roots-by means of the sharp (or strong) exe of non-attachment;
 Then that Abode must be sought, having reached Which one would not return. [The Yogin] would attain nothing but that Primal Person from Whom the old activity (world creation) commences.
 Those who are rid of pride and delusion; have put down the evils of attachment; remain constantly in their own nature of the Self; have their desires completely departed; and are fully liberated from the pairs known as pleasures and pains-these undeluded men go to that changeless Abode.
 The sun does not illumine That; nor the moon and nor the fire; That is My Abode Supreme, having gone to Which they (Yogins) never return.
 A portion just of My own Self, having become the eternal individual Soul in the world of the living ones, draws [into service] the sense organs, of which the sixth is the mind, and which rest in the Prakrti.
 Whatsoever body he attains to and also from whatsoever He goes up, the Lord proceeds taking them with Him just as the wind takes odours from their receptacle.
 Presiding over the ear, the eye, the touch-sense the taste-sense and also the smell-sense and the mind, He enjoys the sense objects.
 The deluded do not perceive; [but] the men of knowledge-eye do see Him, as He dwells of rises up or enjoys what is endowed with Strands.
 The exerting men of Yoga perceive Him dwelling in the Self. [But] the unintelligent men with their uncontrolled self do not perceive Him, even though they exert.
 That light which is found in the sun, which is in the moon, and which is [also] in the fire-all illuminating the entire world-know that light to be of Mine.
 And penetrating the earth I support [all] beings with [My] energy; being the sapful moon, I nourish all plants.
 Being the digestive fire dwelling within the body of living creatures, and being in association with the upward and downward winds [of the body], I digest the four kinds of food.
 I am entered (the Self-conciousness is felt) in the heart of all; from Me (this Self-consciousness) come the faculty of memory, the faculty of knowing, and also the faculty of differentiating; none but Me is to be known by means of all the Vedas and I am alone the author of the final part of the Vedas and also the author of the Vedas themselves.
 There are two persons in the world, the perishing and the nonperishing : the perishing is all elements [and] the speak-like One is called the nonperishing.
 But the Highest Person, distinct [from both this] is spoken of as the Supreme Self, which, being the changeless Lord, sustains the triad of the world by entering into it.
 Becuase, I have transcended the perishing and also the nonperishing, therefore I am acclaimed in the world as well as in the Veda as the Highest of persons.
 He, who, being not deluded, thus knows Me as the Highest of persons - he knows all and serves Me with his entire being, O descendant of Bharata !
 Thus the most secret scripture has been taught by Me, O sinless one; by understanding this, let a man become wise and also become one who has accomplished what reires to be accomplished, O descendant of Bharata !
