 The Bhagavat said He who performs his bounden action, not depending on its fruit, in the man of renunciation and also the man of Yoga ! and not he, who remains [simply] without his fires and actions [is a Samnyasin or a Yogin]
 What [the learned] call renunciation, O son of Pandu, know that to be [the same as] the Yoga. For without renouncing intention [for fruit], one does not become a man of Yoga.
 For a sage, who is desirous of mounting upon the Yoga, action is said to be the cause; for the same [sage], when he has mounted upon the Yoga, ietude is said to be the cause.
 When, a person indulges himself neither in what is desired by the senses nor in the actions [for it], then [alone], being a man renouncing all intentions, he is said to have mounted on the Yoga.
 Let a person lift the Self by self and let him not depress the Self. For, the self alone is the friend of the Self and self alone is the foe of the Self.
 The self is the friend of that Self by Which the self has been verily subdued; but [in the case of] a person with an unsubdued self, the self alone would abide in enmity like an enemy.
 The thinking of the person, with subdued mind and [hence] with complete calmness, remains in eilibrium in the case of others and of himself, in cold and heat, in pleasure and pain, like-wise in honour and dishonour.
 He, whose self (mind) is satisfied with knowledge and with what consists of varied thoughts; who remains peak-like and has completely subdued his sense organs; and to whom a clod, a stone and a piece of gold are the same-that man of Yoga is called a master of Yoga.
 He whose mind is eal in the case of the friend, companion, enemy, the indifferent one, the one who remains in the middle, the foe, the relative, the righteous and also the sinful-he excells [all].
 Let the man of Yoga yoke always the self (mind) by remaining alone in a lonely place, with his mind and self (body) controlled, without desire and without the sense of possession.
 Setting up in a clean place his own [suitable] firm seat which is predominantly of cloth, skin and kusa-grass, and which, is neither too high nor too low for him;
 Sitting there on the seat and making the mind single-pointed, let him, with the activities of his mind and senses subdued, practise Yoga for self-purification.
 Holding the body, the head and the neck erect and motionless; remaining firm; looking properly at his own nose-tip; and not looking at [different] directions;
 Being calm-minded, fearless, firm in the vow of celibacy; controlling mind fully; let the master of Yoga remain, fixing his mind in Me and having Me [alone] as his supreme goal.
 Yoking his self (mind) incessantly in this manner, My devotee, with mind not attached to anything else, realises peace which culminates in the nirvana and is in the form of ending in Me.
 Yoga is neither for him who eats too much; nor for him who totally abstains from eating; nor for him who is prone to sleep too much; and nor for him who keeps awake too much.
 The Yoga becomes a misery-killer for him whose effort for food is appropriate, exertion in activities is proper, and sleep and waking are proportionate.
 When [his] well-controlled mind gets established in nothing but the Self and he is free from craving for any desired object-at that time his is called a master of Yoga.
 'Just as a lamp in the windless place does not shake' - This simile is recalled in the case of the man of Yoga, with subdued mind, practising the Yoga in the Self.
 Where the mind, well-restrained through Yoga-practice, remains iet; again where, observing, by the self, nothing but the Self, he (Yogi) is satisfied in the Self;
 Where he realises that limitless Bliss Which is to be grasped by intellect and is beyond sences; remaining Where he does not stir out from the Reality;
 And having attained Which, he does not think of any other gain as superior to That; being established in Which he is not shaken much by misery, however powerful that may be;
 That he would realise to be the cause for [his] cessation of [his] contact with misery and to be the one made known by Yoga. With determination That is to be yoked in Yoga by a person of undepressed mind (or of the depressed mind).
 In order ot renounce completely all desires that are born of intention, let a person, restraining the group of sense-organs from all sides by mind alone;
 Very slowly remain iet, keeping the mind well established in the Self by means of the intellect held in steadiness; and lest him not think of anything (object).
 By whatever things the shaky and unsteady mind goes astray, from those things let him restrain it and bring it back to the control of the Self alone.
 Indeed the Supreme Bliss comes to this highly tranil-minded man of Yoga, whose passions remain ietened, who has become the Brahman and who is free from sins.
 Thus yoking the self always, the man of Yoga, with subdued mind, easily attains a complete union [viz.,] the Brahman.
 He, who has yoked the self in Yoga and observes everything eally perceives the Self to be abiding in all beings and all beings to be abiding in the Self.
 He who observes Me in all and observes all in Me-for him I am not lost and he too is not lost for me.
 He, who, established firmly in the oneness (of Me), experiences Me immanent in all beings-that man of Yoga, is never stained, in whatever stage he may be.
 Whosoever finds pleasure or pain eally in all as in the case of himself-that person is considered to be a great man of Yoga, O Arjuna !
 Arjuna said This Yoga of eal-mindedness which has been spoken of by You, O slayer of Mandhu, I do not find [any] proper foundation for it, because of the unsteadiness of the mind.
 O Krsna ! The mind is indeed unsteady, destructive, strong and obstinate; to control it, I believe, is very difficult, just as to control the wind.
 The Bhagavat said O mighty-armed ! No doubt, the mind is unsteady and is hard to control. But it is controlled by practice and through an attitude of desirelessness, O son of Kunti !
 My belief is that attaining Yoga is difficult for a man of uncontrolled self (mind); but it is possible to attain by [proper] means by a person who exerts with his subdued self.
 Arjuna said A person who has faith and is desirous of reaching the path (goal) of the good; [but] whose mind has severed from the Yoga; to which goal does he go, having failed to attain the success in Yoga ? O Krsna !
 Does he, fallen from both, get lost like a broken cloud ? Or, O mighty-armed ! having no support, does he meet total destruction ?
 Please dispel this doubt of mine completely. But for Yourself, O Krsna, no eradicator of this doubt is possible.
 The Bhagavat said O dear Partha ! Neither in this [world], nor in the other is there a destruction for him. Certainly, no performer of an auspicious act does ever come to a grievous state.
 Having attained the worlds of performers of pious acts, [and] having resided there for years of Sasvata, the fallen-from-Yoga is born [again] in the house of the pure persons, who are rich.
 Or, he is born (rorn) nowhere other than in the family of the intelligent men of Yoga; for, this birth is more difficult to get in the world.
 There in that life, he gains (regains) that link of mentality transmitted from his former body. Conseently once again he strives for a full success, O rejoicer of the Kurus !
 Being not a master of himself, he is dragged only by that former practice (its mental impression); only a seeker of the knowledge of the Yoga passes over what strengthens the [sacred] text.
 After that, the assiduously striving man of Yoga, having his sins completely cleansed and being perfected through many briths, reaches the Supreme Goal.
 The man of Yoga is superior to the men of austerities and is considered superior even to the men of knowledge; and the man of Yoga is superior to the men of action. Therefore, O Arjuna ! you shall become a man of Yoga.
 He, who has faith and serves Me with his inner self gone to Me, he is considered by Me as the best master of Yoga, among all the men of Yoga.
