 Arjuna said O krsna, you commend renunciation of action and again the Yoga of action; which one of these two is superior [to the other] ?  Please tell me that for certain.
 The Bhagavat said Both renunciation and the Yoga of action effect salvation. But, of these two, the Yoga of action is better than renunciation of action.
 That person may be considered a man of permanent renunciation, who neither hates nor desires. For, O mighty-armed ! he who is free from the pairs [of opposites] is easily released from bondage [of action].
 The childish, and not the wise, proclaim the paths of knowledge and the Yoga as different. He, who has properly resorted to even one [of these two], gets the fruit of both.
 What state is reached by men of knowledge-path the same is reached by men of Yoga subseently. [So] whosoever sees the knowledge-path and the Yoga to be one, he sees [correctly].
 O mighty-armed (Arjuna) ! Renunciation is certainly hard to attain excepting through Yoga; the sage who is the master of Yoga attains the Brahman, before long.
 A master of Yoga, whose self (mind and intellect) is very pure and is fully subdued, the sense-organs controlled, and Soul is [realised to be] the Soul of all beings-he is not stained, eventhough he is a performer [of actions].
 A master of Yoga, knowing the reality would think 'I do not perform any action at all'. For, he who, while seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, going, sleeping and breathing;
 Taking, rejecting, receiving, opening and closing the eyes, bears in mind that the sense-organs are on their respective objects; and
 Who performs actions by offering them to the Brahman and giving up attachment-he is not stained by sin just as the lotus-leaf is [not stained] by water.
 Having given up attachment, the men of Yoga perform action, just with the body, with the mind, with intellect and also with sense-organs, for attaining the Self.
 Having abandoned [the attachment for] the fruit of actions, the master of Yoga attains the highest Peace. [But] the person, other than the master of Yoga, attached to the fruit of action, is bound by his action born of desire.
 Having renounced all actions by mind, a man of self-control, dwells happily in his body, a nine-win-dowed mansion, neither performing, nor causing others to perform [actions].
 The Lord (Self) acires neither the state of being a creator of the world, nor the actions, nor the connecting with the fruits of their actions. But it is the inherent nature [in It] that exerts.
 The Omnimanifest (Soul) takes [upon Itself] neither sin nor merit [born] of any [action]. But, the perfect knowledge is clouded by Illusion and hence the creatures are deluded.
 In the case of those whose Illusion has been, however, destroyed by the Self-knowledge, then for them that knowledge illumines itself, like the sun.
 Those, who have their intellect and self (mind) gone to This; who have established themselves in This and have This [alone] as their supreme goal; and who have washed off their sins by means of [perfect] knowledge-they reach a state from which there is no more return.
 The wise men look, by nature, eally upon a Brahmana, rich in learning and humility, on a cow, on an elephant, and on a mere dog and on a dog-cooker (an out-caste).
 The Brahman-knower, who is disillusioned, who is established in Brahman and has a firm intellect, would neither rejoice on meeting a friend nor get agitated on meeting a foe.
 He who, with his self (mind) not attached to the external contacts, finds happiness in the Self-that person, with his self engaged in the Yoga, pervades easily, suffering no loss, the Brahman.
 The enjoyments that are born of contacts [with objects] are indeed nothing but sources of misery and have beginning and end. [Hence], an intelligent man does not get delighted in them, O son of Kunti !
 Whosoever, right here, before abandoning the body, is capable of bearing the force sprung from desire and wrath-he is considered to be a man of Yoga and a happy man.
 He, whose pleasure, delight and again light are just within-O son of Prtha ! he attains the supreme Yoga, himself becoming the Brahman.
 The seers, whose dirts have decayed; by whom dualities have been out off; whose self (mind) is controlled; and who are delighted in the welfare of all; they gain the Brahman, the Tranil One.
 At all times there is the tranil Brahman for the ascetics who have severed their connection with desire and anger, who have controlled their mind and have realised their Self.
 Warding off the external contacts outside; making the sense of sight in the middle of the two wandering ones; counter-balancing both the forward and backward moving forces that travel within what acts crookedly;
 The sage, who has controlled his sense-organs, mind and intellect; whose chief aim is emancipation; and from whom desire, fear and wrath have departed-he remains just free always.
 Having known Me as the Enjoyer of [the fruits of] sacrifices and austerties, as the great Lord of all the worlds, and as the Friend of all beings, he (the man of Yoga) attains peace.
 There is no such translation for this sloka.
