 Arjuna said O Janardana, if knowledg is held to be superior to action by You, then why do You engage me in action that is terrible, O Kesava ?
 You appear to perplex my intellect with Your speech that looks confusing. Hence tell me, with certainty, that particular thing by which I may attain the good (emancipation).
 The Bhagavat said The two-fold path in this world-[the one] with Yoga of knowledge for men of reflection [and the other] with Yoga of action for men of Yoga-has been declared to be one by Me formerly, O sinless one !
 A person attains actionlessness not [just] by non-commencement of actions; and not just by renunciation, he attains success (emancipation).
 For, no one can ever remain, even for a moment, as a non-performer of action; because everyone, being not master of himself, is forced to perform action by the Strands born of the Prakrti (Material cause)
 Controlling organs of actions, whosoever sits with his mind, pondering over the sense objects-that person is a man of deluded soul and [he] is called a man of deluded action.
 But, controlling sense-organs by mind, whosoever undertakes the Yoga of action with the action-senses he, the detached one, is superior [to others], O Arjuna !
 You must perform your action which has been enjoined. For, action is superior to inaction; and even the maintenance of your body could not be properly accomplished through inaction.
 The world is fettered by action which is other than the Yajnartha action; hence, O son of Kunti, being freed from attachment, you most properly perform Yajnartha action.
 Having created creatures formerly [at the time of creation] together with necessary action, the Lord of creatures declared : 'By means of this, you shalll propagate yourselves; and let this be your wish-fulfilling-cow.'
 'With this you must gratify the devas and let the devas gratify you; [thus] gratifying one another, you shall attain the highest good.'
 The devas, gratified with necessary action will grant you the things sacrificed. [Hence] whosoever enjoys their gifts without offering them to these devas-he is surely a thief.
 The righteous persons, who eat the remnants (objects enjoined) of the actions to be performed necessarily, are freed from all sins. But those who cook, intending their own selves, are sinners and eat sin.
 From food arise the things that are born; from the rain-cloud the food arises; from the sacrifice the rain-cloud arises; the sacrifices arises from action;
 Action arises from the Brahman, you should know this; the Brhaman arises from what does not stream forth; therefore the all-pervading Brahman is permanently based on the sacrifice.
 Whosoever does not roll forward the wheel, thus set in motion in this world, he is a man of sinful life rejoicing in the senses; and he lives in vain, O son of Prtha !
 But the man, who simply rejoices in the Self; and who is satisfied in the Self; and who delights in the Self alone-there exists no action for him to be performed.
 No purpose is served for him by what he has done or by what he has not done. For him there is hardly any dependenc on any purpose among all beings.
 Therefore, unattached always, you should perform action that is to be performed; for, the person, performing action without attachment, attains the Supreme.
 It was by action alone that Janaka and others had attained emancipation. Further, at least having regard to hold the world (the society) together you should act.
 Whatsoever a great man does, other commoners do the same; whatever standard he sets up, the world follows that.
 O son of Prtha ! For Me, in the three worlds there is nothing that must be done; nor is there any thing unattained [so far] to be attained; and yet I exert in action.
 For, if I were ever not at work unwearied, all men would follow My path, O son of Prtha !
 These worlds would perish if I were not to perform action; and I would be a cause of confusion; I would destroy these people.
 [Therefore] just as the unwise persons, being attached to action, do, O son of Prtha, so the wise should perform, [But] being unattached and desiring to hold the world together.
 Let the wise master of Yoga fulfil (or destroy) all actions by performing them all, and let him not creat any disturbance in the mind of the ingnorant persons attached to action.
 The actions are performed part by part, by the Strands of the Prakrti; [yet] the person, having his self (mind) deluded with egoity, imagines 'I am [alone] the doer'.
 But, O mighty-armed one, the knower of the real nature of the divisions of the Strands and of their [respective] divisions of work, realises : 'The Strands are at their [respective] purposes' And hence he is not attached.
 Men, completely deluded by the Strands of the Prakrti, are attached to the actions of the Strands. Man, who know fully, should not confuse them, the dullard, who do not know fully.
 Renouncing all actions in Me, with mind that concentrates on the Self; being free from the act of reesting and from the sense of possession; and [conseently being free from [mental] fever; you should fight.
 Those who constantly follow this doctrine of Mine-such men, with faith and without finding fault [in it], are freed from [the results of] all actions.
 But those who, finding fault, do not follow this doctrine of Mine-be sure that these men to be highly deluded in all [branches of] knowledge and to be lost and brainless.
 Even a man of knowledge acts in conformity to his own Prakrti, the elements go [back] to the Prakrti; [and] what will the restraint avail ?
 [For a man of worldly life] there are likes and dislikes clearly fixed with regard to the objects of each of his sense organs. These are the obstacles for him. [The wise] would not come under the control of these.
 Better is one's own duty, [though] it lacks in merit, than the well-performed duty of another; better is the ruin in one's own duty than the good fortune from another's duty.
 Arjuna said Then, induced by what, does this person [of the world] commit sin-eventhough he does not desire it-as if instigated by a force, overpowering [him] ?
 The Bhagavat said This desire, this wrath, born of the Rajas-Strand, is a swallower of festival [and] a mighty bestower of sins. Know this to be the enemy here.
 As the fire is concealed by smoke and a mirror by dirt, and as the embryo is concealed by membrance-cover, so He is concealed by this (foe).
 O son of Kunti ! The knowledge of the wise is concealed by this eternal foe, which looks like a desired one, and which is the fire insatiable.
 It basis is said to be the sense-organs, the mind and the intellect. With these it deludes the embodied by concealing knowledge.
 Therefore, O best among the Bharatas, by controlling completely the sense-organs in the beginning [itself], you must avoid this sinful one, destroying the knowledge-action.
 Different are the sense-organs [from their objects], they say; from the sense-organs different is the mind; from the mind too the intellect is different; what is different from the intellect is That (Self).
 Thus being conscious : 'That is different from the intellect'; and steadying the self with the self; kill the foe that is of the form of desire and that is hard to approach.
