 The Bhagavat said Fearlessness, complete purity of the Sattva, steadfastness in knowledge-Yoga, charity, and self-restraint and [Vedic] sacrifice, recitation of scriptures, austerity, uprightness;
 Harmlessness, truth, absence of anger, renunciation, absence of attachment, absence of calumny, compassion to living beings, and absence of greed, gentleness, modesty, absence of thoughtlessness;
 Vital power, forgiveness, fortitude, contenment, absence of treachery and absence of excessive pride-these are in the person who is born for divine wealth, O Descendant of Bharata !
 Ostentation, arrogance, pride, anger, and also harshness, and ignorance, are in the person born for the demoniac wealth, O son of Prtha !
 The divine wealth is meant for total emancipation and the demoniac one is meant for complete bondage. Grieve not, O son of Pandu. For the divine wealth you are born
 There are two types of creations of beings in this world [viz.] the divine and also the demoniac. The divine one has been properly described in detail; hear [now] the demoniac one from Me, O son of Prtha !
 The demoniac men do not know the origin and the withdrawal; neither purity, nor good conduct, nor truth does exist in them.
 They say that this world is without truth; has no basis; and has no Lord; this is born not on the basis of the mutual cause-and-effect-relation [of the things]; it has nothing [beyond] and has no cause.
 Clinging to this view, the inauspcious men of the ruined Souls, of the poor intellect, and of the cruel deeds, strive for the destruction of the world.
 Holding to their insatiable desire; being possessed by hypocricy, avarice, and pride; and holding evil intention, these cruel men wander with impure resolve.
 Adhering to their anxiety that is ultimited and may end only at the time of dissolution; viewing the gratification of their desires alone as their highest goal; ascertaining that this much alone exists;
 Being bound by hundreds of ropes of longing; and being devoted to their desire and anger, they seek, by unjust means, hoards with wealth, for the purpose of the gratification of their desires.
 'This has been gained by me to-day; this object of my desire I shall attain in future; this is mine [now]; and this wealth also shall be mine [soon]';
 'That enemy has been slain by me; and I shall slay others also; I am the lord; I am a man of enjoyment; I am successful, mighty and happy';
 'I am rich; I am of of noble birth; who else is eal ot me ? I shall perform sacrifices; I shall give gifts; and I shall rejoice' - deluded by these wrong ideas;
 Endowed with many thoughts; confused highly; enslaved simply by their delusion; and addicated to the gratification of desires; they fall into the hell and into what is foul.
 Self-conceited, stubborn, filled with pride and arrogance of wealth, they pretend to perform sacrifices with hypocricy, not following injunction [of the Vedas].
 Clinging fast to egotism, force, pride, craving, and anger, these envious men hate Me in the bodies of their own and of others.
 These hateful, cruel, basest men, I hurl incessantly into the inauspicious demoniac wombs alone in the cycle of birth-and-death.
 Having come to the demoniac womb, birth after birth, and not attaining Me at all, these deluded persons, therefore, pass to the lowest state, O son of Kunti !
 To the hell, three-fold is the gate that ruins the Self : [They are] desire, anger as well as greed. Hence one should avoid these three.
 O son of  Kunti ! A man, who has deserted these three gates of darkness, does what is good for his Self and thery reaches the highest goal.
 He, who neglects the injunction of the scriptures, and acts according to his own will-he attains neither the success, nor happiness nor the highest goal (emancipation).
 Therefore, by considering the scripture as your authority in determining as to what is to be done and what is not to be done, you should perform action, laid down by the regulations of the scriptures.
