 Arjuna Said What is that Brahman ? What is termed the Lord-of-the-self (adhyatma) ? What is action ? O the Best-of-persons ! What is stated to be the Lord-of -material-things (adhibhuta) ? What is called Lord-of-divinities (adhidaiva) ?
 Who is Lord-of-sacrifices (adhiyajna) [and] how ? Who in this body ? O slayer of Madhu ! How are You to be realised by the self-controlled ones at the time of their journey (i.e., death) also ?
 The Bhagavat said The immutable Absolute is the Brahman. Its intrinsic nature is called the Lord of the self. The emitting activity that causes the birth of both the animate and the inanimate is named 'action '.
 The changing nature is the lord of the material beings; the Person alone is the lord of the divinites; I am alone the Lord of sacrifices and I, the best of the embodied (Souls), dwell in this body.
 Whosoever, at the time of death also remembering Me alone, sets forth by abandoning his body [behind], he attains My being. There is no doubt about it.
 And also remembering whatever being, a person leaves his body at the end [of his life], that being alone he attains, O son of Kunti ! [Because] he has been constantly thinking about that being.
 Therefore at all times keep Me in the mind and also fight; then, having your mind and intellect dedicated to Me, you will doubtlessly attain Me alone.
 He, who is engaged in the after-reflection (who meditates) on the Supreme Divine Soul with his mind, remaining fixed in the practice-Yoga and [hence] passing over no other object - that person attains [that Supreme], O son of Prtha !
 He, who meditates continuously on the Ancient Seer, the Ruler, the Subtler than the subtle, the Supporter of all, the Unimaginable-formed, the Sun-coloured, and That which is beyond the darkness;
 That person endowed with a steady mind, with devotion and also with the Yoga-power, reaches at the time of journey that Supreme Divine Soul, by fixing properly the life-breath in between his eye brows.
 That Unchanging One which the Veda-knowers speak of; Which the passion-free ascetics enter into; seeking Which they practise celibacy (or spiritual life); that Goal together with means  [to reach It] I shall tell you.
 Properly controlling all the gates [in the body]; well restraining the mind in the heat; fixing one's own prana in the head; taking resort to the firmness of the Yoga;
 Reciting the single-syllabled Om, the very Brahman; meditating on Me; whosoever travels well, casting away [his] body-surely he attains My State.
 And whosoever constantly bears Me in mind never attached to any other object-for this Yogin, ever devout, I am easy to attain, O son of Prtha !
 Having attained Me, the men of great soul who have achieved the supreme perfection, do not get the transient rirth, a store-house of all troubles.
 Till the Brahman [is attained], people do return from [each and every] world, O Arjuna ! But there is no rirth for one who has attained Me, O son of Kunti !
 Those who know the day of Brahma as compassing one thousand yugas (world-ages), and night [also] as compassing one thousand yugas-those men know the day and night of Brahma.
 While the day approaches, all manifestations issue forth from the unmanifest and while the night approaches they dissolve into the same that bears the name 'the unmanifest.'
 Being born and born again, the self same multitude of beings gets dissolved while the night approaches, and issues forth willy-nilly while the day approaches, O son of Prtha !
 But there exists another Being which is beyond this, and It is both manifest and unmanifest and is etnernal. It is this Being that does not perish while all [the other] beings perish.
 [The scriptures] speak of This as Unmanifest and Changeless and declare This is to be the highest Goal. Having attained which people do not return, this is My highest abode.
 The Supreme Soul. O son of Prtha, is attainable through devotion that admits no other things; having attained Which Soul, the men of Yoga do not get birth again; within Which exist the beings; and in Which everything is well established, O Arjuna !
 Departing at what times the Yogins attain the non-return or the return only-those times I shall declare to you, O chief of the Bharatas !
 The northern course [of the sun] consisting of six months, is fire, light, day and bright one. Departing in it, the Brahman-knowing men attain the Brahman .
 The southern course [of the sun], consisting of six months, is smoke, night, and also dark. [Departing] in it, the Yogin attains the moon's light and he returns.
 For, these two bright and dark courses are considered to be perpetual for the world. One attains the non-return by the first of these, and one returns back by the other one.
 O son of Prtha, not a single Yogin, knowing these two courses, gets deluded. Therefore, O Arjuna, be practising Yoga connected with all times.
 Having understood all this, the Yogin goes beyond whatever fruit of merit is ordained [in the scriptures] in case the Vedas [are recited], the sacrifices [performed], the austerities [observed], and also gifts [donated]; and he goes to the Supreme Primeval Abode.
