 Arjuna said Those devotees who, being constantly attached [to You], worship You thus; and also those who [worship] the motionless Unmanifest-of these who who are the best knowers of Yoga ?
 The Bhagavat said Those, who, causing their mind to enter well into Me, and being permanently attached [to Me], and endowed with an extraordinary faith, worship Me - they are considered by Me to be the best among the masters of Yoga.
 Those, who contemplate on the Unmanifest, Which is motionless, undefinable, all-pervading, unthinkable, peaklike, unmoving and fixed;
 Who, by restraining properly the group of sense-organs have eanimity at all stages, and find pleasure in the welfare of all beings - they attain nothing but Me.
 (But) the trouble is much more for them, who have their mind fixed on the Unmanifest; for the Unmanifest-goal is attained with difficulty by men, bearing body.
 On the other hand, those who, having renounced all their actions in Me, have Me [alone] their goal; and revere Me, meditating on Me by that Yoga alone, which admits no other element but Me in it;
 Of them, having their mind completely entered in Me, I become, before long, a redeemer from the ocean of the death-cycle, O son of Prtha !
 [Hence], fix your mind on nothing but Me; cuase your taught to settle in Me. Thus resorting to the best Yoga, you will dwell in Me alone.
 In case you are not able to cause your mind to enter completley into Me, then, O Dhananjaya ! seek to attain Me by the practice-Yoga.
 If you are incapable of doing a [steady] practice, then have, your chief aim, of performing actions for Me. Even by performing actions for Me, You shall attain success.
 Now, if you are not capable of doing this too, then taking resort to My Yoga renounce the fruit of all action, with your self (mind) subdued.
 For, knowledge is superior to practice; because of knowledge, meditation becomes pre-eminent; from meditation issues the renunciation of fruits of actions; and to renunciation, peace remains next.
 He, who is not a hater, [but] only a compassionate friend of every being; who is free from the sense of 'mine, 	 and the sense of 'I'; who is even minded in pain and pleasure and is endowed with forbearance;
 Who remains well-content and is a man of Yoga at all times; who is self-controlled and is firmly resolute; and who has offered to Me his mind and intellect-that devotee of Mine is dear to Me.
 He, on account of whom the world does not get agitated; who too does not feel agitated on account of the world; who is free from joy and impatience, fear and anxiety-he is dear to Me.
 He, who does not expect [anything]; who is pure, dexterous, unconcerned, untroubled; and who has renonced all his undertakings all around-that devotee of Mine is dear to Me.
 He, who neither delights no hates, nor grieves, nor craves; who has renounced both the good and the bad results [of actions] and is full of devotion [to Me]-he is dear to Me.
 He, who feels alike to the foe and to the friend and also to honour and to dishonour; who feels alike to cold and to heat, to pleasure and to pain; who is totally free from attachment;
 To whom blame and praise are eal; who is silent (does not over-speak) and is well content with one thing or other [that comes to him]; who has no fixed thought [in the mundane life]; who is [yet] steady-minded [in spiritual practice] and is full of devotion-that man is dear to Me.
 Those, who resort, as instructed above, to this duty [conducive to] immortality, who have faith [in it] and have Me alone their goal - those devotees are exceedingly dear to Me.
