 No such translation is available for this sloka.
 The Bhagavat said O son of Kunti ! This [physical] hody is called 'Field' [and decayer-cum-protector]; He, who sensitiezes it - His knowers call Him properly as 'Field-sensitizer'.
 O descendant of Bharata ! You should know Me to be also the Field-sensitizer in the Fields of all. The knowledge of the Field and the Field-sensitizer-that knowledge is [in fact] the understanding of Me.
 What that Field is and of what nature it is; why it modifies, whence and what; and who he (the Field-sensitizer) is; and of what nature He is; listen to [all] that from Me collectively.
 This has been sung many times by sages, and also has been clearly decided in the various Vedas in different contexts by means of [their] words that are suggestive of the Brahman (i.e. in the Upanisads) and are full of reasoning.
 The [five] great elements, the Egotism. The Intellect, the Unmanifest, and also the ten organs and the one (organ and the) five objects of the sense-organs;
 The desire, the hatred. the pleasure, the pain, the aggregate, the sensibility and the feeling of satisfaction (or self-?nd) : This, together with modification, is what is collectively called 'the Field, together with modification'.
 Absence of pride; absence of hypocricy; harm-lessness; patience; uprightness; service to the preceptor; purity [of mind and body]; steadfastness; self-control;
 Absence of desire for sense-objects; and also absence of egotism; pondering over the evils of birth, death, old age, sickness and sorrow;
 Non-attachment; detachment towards [one's] children, wives, houses and the like; and a constant eal-mindedness on the occurrence of the desirable and the undesirable things;
 And an unfailing devotion towards Me, with the Yoga of non-difference; resorting to solitary place; distaste for a crowd of people;
 Constancy in the Self-knowledge; and viewing things of knowing the Reality-all this is declared to be [conducive to or manifesting] true knowledge, and what is opposed to this is [conducive to or manifesting] wrong knowledge.
 I shall describe that which is to be known, by knowing which one attains freedom from death : beginningless is the Supreme Brahman; It is said to be neither existent nor non-existent.
 It has hands and feet of all, has eyes, heads and faces of all, has ears of all in the world; It remains enveloping all.
 It causes all the sense-alities to shine; [yet] It is without any sense-organ; It is unattached, yet all-supporting; It is free from the Strands, yet enjoys the Strands.
 It is without and within every being and is unmoving and yet moving too; due to Its subtle nature It is incomprehensible; It exists far away, yet near It is.
 It remains undistinguished (common) in the distinguished [beings], and appears as if distinguished. It is to be known as the supporter of beings, and also as [their] swallower and orginator.
 This is the Light even of [all] the lights, [and] is stated to be beyond darkness; It is to be known by [the above] knowledge; It is to be attained [only] by knowledge; and It distinctly remains in the heart of all.
 This field as well as the knowledge and what is to be known, all are mentioned collectively; clearly understanding this, My devotee becomes worthy of My state.
 Both the Material Cause and the Soul too are beginningless, you should know this; you should also know that the modifications and Strands are born of the Material Cause.
 In creating [the process of] cause-and-effect, the Material Cause is said to be the basis; and in experiencing pleasure and pain, the Soul is said to be the basis.
 For, the Soul, seated on the Material Cause, enjoys the Strands born of the Material Cause; His attachment to the Strands is the cause for his births in the good and evil wombs.
 The Supreme Soul in this [corporeal] body is called the Spectator, the Assentor, the Supporter, the Experiencer, the Mighty Lord and also the Supreme Self.
 He who knows, in this manner, the Soul and the Material Cause together with Strands-he is not born again, even though he behaves in different ways.
 [However] by means of meditation, certain persons (Yogis) perceive the Self as the Self in the self (the heart etc.); others by the knowledge-Yoga; and others by the action-Yoga.
 But others, who have no knowledge of this nature, listen from others and practise reflection [accordingly] they too, being devoted to what they have heard, do cross over death.
 Whatever living being is born, stationary or moving, you should know that all this has a close connection with the Field and the Field-sensitizer, O the best of the Bharatas !
 Whosoever perceives the Supreme Lord as abiding and as non-perishing in all beings alike, while they perish - he perceives properly.
 Whosoever, perceiving the Lord as abiding in all alike, does not harm the Self by the Self-he attains, on that account, the Supreme Goal.
 Whosoever views all actions as being performed (or all objects as being created), indeed by the Material Cause itself and at the same time views his own Self as non-performer (or non-creator) - he veiws properly.
 When he perceives the [mutual] difference of beings as abiding in One, and its expansion from That alone, at that time he becomes the Brahman.
 Because This is beginningless, and because This has no alities, this Supreme Self is changeless and It neither acts, nor gets stained [by actions], even-though It dwells in the body, O son of Kunti !
 Just as the all-pervading Ether is not stained because of its subtleness, in the same fashion the Self, abiding in the body everywhere, is not stained.
 Just as a single sun illumines this entire world, so also the Lord-of-the-Field illumines the entire Field, O descendant of Bharata !
 Those who thus understand, with the knowledge-eye, the inner Soul of the Field and the Field-sensitizer and also the deliverance from the Material Cause of the elements-they attain the Supreme.
