 The Bhagavat said To you, who is entertaining no displeasure, I shall clearly declare also this most secret knowledge, together with action, by knowing which you shall be free from evil.
 This shines among the sciences; (this is) the secret of monarchs; it is a supreme purifier, it is comprehensible by immediate perception, is righteous, easy to do, and imperishable.
 O scorcher of foes ! Having no faith in this Dharma, persons do not attain Me and remain eternally in the circuit of mundane existence, wrought with death.
 This entire universe is pervaded by Me, having the unmanifest form (aspect); all beings exist in Me and I do not exist in them.
 Yet, the beings do not exist in Me. Look at the Sovereign Yoga of Mine. My Self is the sustainer of the beings, does not exist in beings, and cuases beings to be born.
 Just as the mighty wind exists in the ether, always moving [in it] everywhere, in the same manner all beings exist in Me. Be sure of it.
 O son of Kunti, all beings pass into the nature [of Mine] at the end of the Kalpa (the age of universe); I send them forth again at the beginning of the [next] Kalpa.
 Taking hold of My own nature I send forth again and again this entire host of beings, which is powerless under the control of [My] nature.
 O Dhananjaya ! These acts do not bind Me, remaining as if unconcerned and unattached in these actions.
 O son of Kunti ! On account of Me, Who remain (only) as an observer and as prime cause, the nature [of Mine] gives birth to [both] the moving and unmoving; hence this world moves in a circle.
 Being unaware of the immutable highest Absolute Supreme nature of Mine, the deluded ones disregard Me dwelling in the human body.
 [They] are of futile aspirations, futile actions, futile knowledge and wrong intellect; and they take recourse only to the delusive nature that is demoniac and also devilish.
 O son of Prtha ! The great-souledmen, however, taking hold of the divine nature and having nothing else in their mind, adore Me by viewing Me as the imperishable prime cuase of beings.
 Ever speaking of My glory, striving with firm resolve, paying homage to Me and being permanently endowed with devotion they worship Me.
 [Of them] some worship Me by knowledge-sacrifice and others by offering sacrifices; [thus] they worship Me, the Universally-faced [either] as One [or] as Many.
 I am determination; I am sacrifice; I am Svadha; I am the juice of the herb; I am the (Vedic) hymn; I am alone the clarified butter also; I am the [sacrificial] fire; (and) I am the act of offering.
 I am the father, the mother, the sustainer and the paternal-grandsire of this world; [I am] the sacred object of knowledge, the syullable Om, the Rk, the Saman, and the Yajus too.
 [I am] the method, the nourisher, the lord, the witness, the abode, the refuge, the good-hearted (friend), the origin, the dissolution, the sustenance, the repository and the imperishable seed [of the world].
 I give heat; I hold back and also end forth rains; I am immortality and also death, the real and also the unreal, O Arjuna !
 The masters of the three Vedas, the Somadrinkers, purified of their sins, aspire for the heavengoal by offering sacrifices to Me. They attain the meritorious world of the lord of gods and taste in the heaven the heavenly pleasures of the gods.
 Having enjoyed that vast world of heaven, they, when their merit is exhausted, enter the world of the mortals. Thus the persons, who long for pleasure and continuously take refuge in the code of conduct prescribed by the Three Vedas, attain the state of going and coming.
 Those men who, having nothing else [as their goal] worship Me everywhere and are thinking of Me [alone]; to them, who are constantly and fully attached [to Me], I bear acisition and the security of acisition.
 O son of Kunti ! Even those who are the devotees of other gods and worship [them] with faith, worship Me alone, [but] following non-injunction;
 Because, I am the enjoyer as well as the lord of all sacrifices. But they do not recognise Me correctly and hence they move away [from Me].
 The votaries of the gods attain the gods; the votaries of the manes attain the manes; performers of sacrifices for the goblins attain the goblins; also the performers of scrifices for Me attain Me.
 Whosoever with devotion offers Me a leaf, a flower, a fruit, or [a little] water, I taste that offered with devotion by one with well-controlled self (mind).
 Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever oblation you offer, whatever gift you make and what-ever austerity you perform, O son of Kunti, do that as an offering to Me.
 Thus, you shall be freed from the good and evi results which are the action-bonds. Having your innate nature immersed in the Yoga of renunciation and (thus) being fully liberated you shall attain Me.
 I am the same in all beings; to Me none is hateful and none is dear; but whosoever worship Me with devotion, they are in Me and I am in them.
 Even if an incorrigible evil-doer worships Me, not resorting to anything else [as his goal], he should be deemed to be righteous; for, he has undertaken his task properly.
 Quickly he becomes righteous-souled (minded) and attains peace permanently. O son of Kunti ! I swear that my devotee gets never lost.
 O son of Prtha, even those who are of sinful birth, [besides] women, men of working class, and the members of the fourth caste-even they, having taken refuge in Me, attain the highest goal.
 Certainly it should be so in the case of the pious men of the priestly class and of the devoted royal seers. Having come to (i.e., being born in) this transient and joyless world, you should be devoted to Me.
 Have your mind fixed on Me; be My devotee; offer scrifice to Me; [and] pay homage to Me; thus fixing your self (internal organ) and having Me as your supreme goal, you shall certainly attain Me.
