 The Bhagavat said Further, once again I shall explain the supreme knowledge, the best among the knowledges, by knowing which all the seers have gone from here to the Supreme Success.
 Holding on to this knowledge, they have attained the state of having attributes common with Me; [and] they are neither born even at the time of creation [of the world], nor do they come to grief at the time of dissolution [of it].
 The mighty Brahman is a womb for Me; and in That I lay seed; therefrom is the birth of all beings, O descendant of Bharata !
 O son of Kunti ! Whatever manifestations spring up in all the wombs, of them the mighty Brahman is the womb and I am the father laying the seed.
 The Strands, viz. the Sattva, the Rajas and the Tamas, born from the Prime Cause (the said Mother), bind the changeless Embodied (Soul) to the body, O mighty-armed One !
 Among them (the Strands) the Sattva-because it is dirtless-is illuminating and healthy; and it binds [the Embodied] by attachment to happiness and also by attachment to knowledge, O sinless one !
 You should know that the Rajas is of the nature of desire and is a source of craving-attachment; and it binds the embodied by the attachment to action, O son of Kunti !
 But, you should [also] know that the Tamas is born of ignorance and is a deluder of all the Embodied; it binds [them] by negligence, laziness and sleep, O descendant of Bharata !
 O descendant of Bharata ! The Sattva fully dominates [the Embodied] in the field of happiness; the Rajas in action; but the Tamas also totally dominates in the field of negligence, by veiling knowledge.
 O descendant of Bharata ! The Sattva increases by overpowering the Rajas and the Tamas; the Rajas [increases by overpowering] the Sattva and the Tamas; and the Tamas does likewise [by overpowering] the Sattva and the Rajas.
 When the knowledge-light arises in all the gates in this body, then one should also know that the Sattva has increased predominantly.
 Greed, exertion, undertaking of actions, unrest, and craving-these are born when the Rajas increases predominantly, O chief of the Bharatas !
 Absence of [mental] illumination, non-excertion, negligence and mere delusion-these are born when the Tamas is on the increase predominantly, O darling of the Kurus !
 But, if the body-bearer dies at the time when Sattva is on the increase, then he attains to the spotless worlds of those, who know the Highest.
 By meeting death when the Rajas [is on the increase], he is born among those who are attached to action; likewise meeting death when the Tamas [is on the increase], he is born in the wombs of the duluded.
 The fruit of good action, they say, is spotless and is of the Sattva; but the fruit of the Rajas is pain, and the fruit of the Tamas is ignorance.
 From the Sattva arises wisdom; from the Rajas only greed; and from the Tamas arise negligence, delusion and also ignorance.
 Those who are established in the Sattva, go upward; the persons given to the Rajas, remain in the middle [state]; those who are given to the Tamas, being established in the tendencies of bad alities, go downwards.
 When the Perceiver (the Self) finds no agent other than the Strands, and realises That which is beyond the Strands, then he attains My state.
 Transcending these three Strands, of which the body [etc.] is born, the Embodied (the Soul), being freed from birth, death, old age and sorrow, attains immortality.
 Arjuna said O Master ! with what characteristic marks does he, who has transcended these three Strands, exist ? Of what behaviour is he ? And, how does he pass beyond these three Strands ?
 The Bhagavat said O son of Pandu ! He does niether abhor nor crave for illumination, and exertion, and delusion too, as and when they arise or cease to be.
 He who, sitting like an unconcerned person, is not perturbed by the Strands; who is ignorant that the Strands exist; (or who remain simply aware that the Strands [alone] exist) who is not shaken;
 To whom pain, pleasure and sleep are alike; to whom a cold, a stone and a lump of gold are alike; to whom both the pleasant and the unpleasant things are eal; who is firm [in mind]; to whom blame and personal commendation are eal;
 Who remains eal to honour and to dishonour, and eal to the sides of [both] the friend and the foe; and who has given up all fruits of his initiatives-he is said to have transcended the Strands.
 Whosoever serves Me alone with an unfailing devotion-Yoga, he, transcending these Strands, turns to be the Brahman.
 'I' is the place of support for the immortal and changeless Brahman and for [Its] eternal attribute, the unalloyed Happiness.
