 Dhrtarastra said O Sanjaya ! What did my men and the sons of Pandu do in the Kuruksetra, the field of righteousness, where the entire warring class has assembled ?orO Sanjaya ! What did the selfish intentions and the intentions born of wisdom do in the human body which is the field-of-duties, the repository of the senseorgans and in which all the murderous ones (passions and asceticism etc.) are confronting [each other].
 Sanjaya said Seeing the army of the sons of Pandu, marshalled in the military array, the prince Duryodhana approached the teacher (Drona) and spoke at that time, these words:
 O teacher ! Behold this mighty army of the sons of Pandu, marshalled in a military array by Drupada's son, your intelligent pupil.
 The heroes and mighty archers, comparable in war to Bhima and Arjuna, here are: Yuyudhana, the king of the Virata country, and Drupada, the mighty warrior;
 Dhrstaketu, Cekitana and the valourous king of Kasi, and Kuntibhoja, the coneror of many,  and the Sibi king,  the best among men;
 And Yudhamanyu, the heroic, and Uttamaujas, the valourous, the son of Subhadra and the sons of Draupadiall are indeed mighty warriors.
 O best among the twice-born ! However, please also take note of the most distinguished amongst us, who are the generals of my army and who are accepted as leaders by the heroes in the mighty army [of mine];  I shall name them to you.
 Your goodself, and Bhisma, and Karna, krpa, Salya, Jayadratha, Asvatthaman, and Vikarna, and Somadatta's son, the valourous;
 And many other heroes, giving up their lives for my sake; fighting with various weapons, all very much skilled in different warfares.
 Thus the army guarded by Bhima is unlimited (or insufficient) for us; on the other hand, the army guarded by Bhisma is limited (or sufficient) for them (the Pandavas).
 Stationed firmly in all [your] respective paths, every one of you without exception should guard Bhisma, above all.
 Generating joy in him, the powerful paternal grandfather (Bhisma), the seniormost among the Kurus, roared highly a lion-roar and blew his conchshell.
 Then all on a sudden, the conch-shells, drums, tabors, trumpets, and cow-horns were sounded; that sound was tumultuous.
 Then, mounted on mighty chariot, yoked with white horses, Madhava (Krsna) and the son of Pandu (Arjuna) blew their heavenly conch-shells;
 Hrsikesa (Krsna) blew the Pancajanya; Dhananjaya (Arjuna) blew the Devadatta; and the Wolf-bellied (Bhimi), of the terrible deeds, blew the mighty conchshell,  Paundra;
 Kunti's son, the king Yudhisthira blew the Anantavijaya; Nakula and Sahadeva blew [respectively] the Sughosa and the Manipuspaka.
 And the king of Kasi, a great archer, and Sikhandin, a mighty warrior; Dhrstadyumna and the king of Virata, and the unconered Satyaki;
 The Pancala king, a mighty archer; and Draupad's sons, who are five in number; and the mighty-armed son of Subhadra blew their own conch-shells individually.
 Revibrating in both the sky and the earth, the tumultuous sound shattered the hearts of Dhrtarastra's men.
 O king! Then observing Dhrtarastra's men, arrayed when the armed clash had [virtually] begun, at that time, Pandu's son, the monkey-bannered one (Arjuna) raising his bow spoke these sentences.
 Arjuna said O Acyuta! Please halt my chariot at a centre place between the two armies, so that I may scrutinize these men who are standing with desire to fight and with whom I have to fight in this great war-effort.
 I may scrutinize those who are ready to fight, who have assled here and are eager to achieve in the battle, what is dear to the evil-minded son of Dhrtarastra.
 - 1.24. Sanjaya said O descendant of Bharata (Dhrtarastra) ! Thus instructed by Gudakesa (Arjuna), Hrsikesa halted the best chariot at a place in between the two armies, in front of Bhisma and Drona and of all the rulers of the earth; and the said: O son of Prtha! Behold these Kurus, assembled.
1.23. -  Sanjaya said O descendant of Bharata (Dhrtarastra) ! Thus instructed by Gudakesa (Arjuna), Hrsikesa halted the best chariot at a place in between the two armies, in front of Bhisma and Drona and of all the rulers of the earth; and the said: O son of Prtha! Behold these Kurus, assembled.
 There in both the armies, the son of Prtha observed his fathers, and paternal grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, sons' sons and comrades, fathers-in-law, and also friends.
 Noticing all those kinsmen arrayed [in the army], the son of Kunti was overpowered by unmost compassion; and being despondent, he uttered this:
 Arjuna Said O krsna! On seeing these war-mongering kinsfolks of my own, arrayed [in the armies], my limbs fail and my mouth goes dry;
 Shivering and horripilation arise in my body; the Gandiva (the bow) slips from my hand and my skin also burns all over.
 I am unable even to stand steady; and my mind seems to be confused; and I see adverse omens, O Kesava!
 I also do not foresee any good by killing my own kinsmen in the battle. O Krsna! I wish niether victory, nor kingdom, nor the pleasures [thereof].
 O Govinda! Of what use in the kingdom to us? Of what use are the pleasures [thereof] and the life even?
 For whose sake we seek kingdom, [its] pleasures and happiness, the very same persons stand arrayed to fight, giving up their life and wealth.
 [These are our] teachers, fathers, sons and also paternal grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, son's sons, wives' brothers, and (other) relatives.
 O slayer-of-Mandhu (Krsna)!  I do not desire to slay these men-even though they slay me-even for the sake of the kingdom of the three worlds-what to speak for the sake of the [mere] earth.
 By slaying Dhrtarastra's sons what joy would be to go us, O Janardana?
 Nothing but sin would slay these desperadoes and take hold of us. Therefore we should not slay Dhrtarastra's sons, our own relatives.
 How could we be happy indeed, O Madhava, after slaying our own kinsmen ?
 Of course, these (Dhrtarastra's sons), with their intellect overpowered by greed, do not see the evil conseences ensuing from the ruin of the family and the sin in cheating friends.
 But, perceiving clearly the evil conseences ensuing from the ruin of the family, should we not have a sense to refrain from this sinful act [of fighting the war], O Janardana ?
 When a family ruins, the etnernal duties of the family perish; when the duties perish, impiety inevitably dominates the entire family.
 Because of the domination of impiety, O Krsna, the women of the family become corrupt; when the women become corrupt, O member of the Vrsni-clan, there arises the intermixture of castes;
 The intermixture leads the family-ruiners and the family to nothing but the hell; for, their ancestors (their individual souls) fall down [in hell], being deprived of the rites of offering rice-balls and water [intended to them].
 On account of these evils of the family-ruiners that cause the intermixture of castes, the eternal caste-duties and family-duties fall into disuse.
 O Janardana! Dwelling in the hell is ite certain for men with their family-duties fallen into disuse: this we have heard.
 Alas! What a great sinful act have we resolved to undertake !  For, out of greed for the joy of kingdom, we are striving to slay our own kinsfolk !
 It would be more beneficial for me if Dhrtarastra's men with weapons in their hands, should slay me, unresisting and unarmed.
 Sanjaya said Having said this much about the battle, and letting his bow fall with arrows, Arjuna sat down on the back of the chariot, with his mind agitated with grief.
