 Sanjaya said To him (Arjuna) who was thus possessed by compassion, whose eyes were confused and filled with tears and who was sinking in despondency, Madhusudana told this [following] sentence.
 The Bhagavat said O Arjuna !  At a critical moment, whence did this sinful act come to you which is practised by men of ignoble (low) birth and which is leading to the hell and is inglorious ?
 Stoop not to unmanliness, O son of Kunti !  It does not befit you. Shirking off the petty weakness of heart, arise, O scorcher of the foes !
 Arjuna said How shall I with arrows fight in battle against Bhisma and Drona, both being worthy of reverence ?  O slayer of Mandhu, O slayer of foes !
 It is good indeed even to go about begging in this world without killing the elders of great dignity; but with greed for wealth, I would not enjoy, by killing my elders, the blood-stained objects of pleasures.
 Whether we should coner [in the battle], or they should coner us-we do not know this viz., 'which [of those two] is better for us'. [For], having killed whom, we would not wish to live at all, the same persons stand before us as Dhrtarastra's men.
 With my very nature, overpowered by the taint of pity, and with my mind, utterly confused as to the right action [at the present juncture],  I ask you: Tell me definitely what would be good [to me]; I am your pupil; please teach me, who am taking refuge in You.
 I do not clearly see what would drive out my grief, the scorcher of my sense-organs, even after achieving, a prosperous and unrivalled kingship in this earth and also the overlordship of the gods [in the heaven].
 Sanjaya said  O scorcher of foes (O Dhrtarastra) ! Having spoken to Hrsikesa (the master of sense-organs), Govinda (Krsna) in this manner, and having declared 'I will not fight', Gudakesa (Arjuna), became silent !
 O descendant of Bharata (O Dhrtarastra) ! Hrsikesa, as if [he was] smiling, spoke to him who was sinking in despondency in between two armies.
 While lamenting for those who cannot be lamented on and those who do not reire to be lamented on, you do not talk like a wise man ! The learned do not lament for those of departed life and those of non-departed life.
 Never indeed at any time [in the past] did I not exist, nor you, nor these kings; and never shall we all not exist hereafter.
 Just as the boyhood, youth and old age come to the embodied Soul in this body, in the same manner is the attaining of another body; the wise man is not deluded at that.
 O son of Kunti ! But the touches with the matras cause the [feelings of] cold and heat, pleasure and pain; they are of the nature of coming and going and are transient. Forbear them, O Descendent of Bharata !
 O the best among persons ! That wise person becomes immortal whom these (situations) do not trouble and to whom the pleasure and pain are eal.
 Birth (or existence) does not happen to what is non-existent, and destruction (or non-existence) to what is existent; the finality of these two has been seen by the seers of the reality.
 And know That to be destructionsless, by Which all this (universe) is pervaded; no one is capable of causing destruction to this changeless One.
 These physical bodies that have an end and suffer the peculiar destruction, are declared to belong to the eternal embodied Soul, Which is destructionless and imcomprehensible. Therefore fight, O descendent of Bharata !
 Whosoever views This to be the slayer and whosoever believes This to be the slain, both these do not understand : This does not slay, nor is This slain.
 This is neither born; nor ever dies; nor, having not been at one time, will This come to be again. This is unborn, destructionless, eternal and ancient and is not slain [even] when the body is slain.
 Whosever realises This to be changeless, destructionless, unborn and immutable, how can that person be slain; how can he either slay [any one] ? O son of Prtha !
 Just as rejecting the tattered garments, a man takes other new ones, in the same way, rejecting the decayed bodies, the embodied (Self) rightly proceeds to other new ones.
 Weapons do not cut This; fire does not burn This; water does not (make) This wet; and the wind does not make This dry.
 This is not to be cut; This is not to be burnt; (This is) not to be made wet and not to be dried too; This is eternal, all-pervading, stable, immobile and eternal.
 This is declared to be non-evident, imponderable, and unchangeable. Therefore understanding This as such you should not lament.
 On the other hand, if you deem This as being born constantly or as dying constantly, even then, O mighty-armed one, you should not lament This.
 Death is certain indeed for what is born; and birth is certain for what is dead. Therefore you should not lament over a thing that is unavoidable.
 O descendant of Bharata !  The beings have an unmanifest beginning, manifest middle and certainly the unmanifest end. On that account why mourning?
 This someone observes as a wonder; similarly another speaks of This as a wonder; another hears This as a wonder; but even after hearing, not even one understands This.
 O descendant of Bharata ! This embodied One in the body of every one is for ever incapable of being slain. Therefore you should not lament over all beings.
 Further, considering your own duty, you should not waver. Indeed, for a Ksatriya there exists no duty superior to fighting a righteous war.
 O son of Prtha ! By good fortune, Ksatriyas, desirous of happiness, get a war of this type [to fight], which has come on its own accord and which is an open door to the heaven.
 On the other hand, if you will not fight this righteous war then you shall incur the sin by avoiding your own duty and fame.
 The creatures will speak of your endless ill-fame; and for the one who has been highly esteemed the illfame is worse than death.
 The mighty charioteers will think of you as having withdrawn from the battle out of fear : having been highly regarded by these men, you shall be viewed lightly.
 Slandering your ability, the enemies will talk of you many sayings that should not be talked of. Is there anything more painful than that ?
 If you are slain you shall attain heaven; or if you coner, you shall enjoy the earth. Therefore, O son of Kunti ! stand up with resolution made in favour of [fighting] the battle.
 Viewing alike, pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory and defeat, you should get then ready for the battle. Thus you will not incur sin.
 Listen, how this knowledge, imparted [to you] for your sankhya, is [also] for the Yoga; endowed with which knowledge you shall cast off the bondage of action, O son of Prtha !
 Here there is no loss due to transgression, and there exists no contrary downward course (sin); even a little of this righteous thing saves [one] from great danger.
 O source of joy to the Kurus !  The knowledge in the form of determination is just one; [but] the knowledge (thoughts) of those who do not have determination, has many branches and has no end.
 - 2.43. O son of Prtha ! Those, whose very nature is desire, whose goal is heaven, who esteem only the Vedic declaration [of fruits], who declare that there is nothing else, who proclaim this flowery speech about the paths to the lordship of the objects of enjoyment-[the paths] that are full of different actionsand who desire action alone as a fruit of their birth-they are men without insight.
2.42. -  O son of Prtha ! Those, whose very nature is desire, whose goal is heaven, who esteem only the Vedic declaration [of fruits], who declare that there is nothing else, who proclaim this flowery speech about the paths to the lordship of the objects of enjoyment-[the paths] that are full of different actionsand who desire action alone as a fruit of their birth-they are men without insight.
 Those, who are very much attached to the ownership of enjoyable objects and whose minds have been carried away by that (flowery speech)-their knowledge, in the form of determination is not prescribed for concentration.
 The Vedas bind by means of the three Strands. [Hence] O Arjuna, you must be free from the three Strands, free from the pairs [of opposites]; be established in this eternal Being; be free from [the idea of] acisition and preservation; and be possessed of the Self.
 What portion in a reservoir, flooded with water everywhere, is useful [for a man in thirst], that much portion [alone] in all the Vedas is useful for an intelligent student of the Vedas.
 Let your claim lie on action alone and never on the fruits; you should never be a cause for the fruits of action; let not your attachment be to inaction.
 O Dhananjaya ! Established in the Yoga, perform actions, abandoning attachment, remaining even-minded in success and failure; for, the even-mindedness is said to be the Yoga.
 O Dhananjaya ! The inferior action stays away at a distance due to Yoga of (one's contact with) determining faculty; in the determining faculty you must seek refuge; wretched are those who constitute the causes for the fruits of action.
 Whosoever is endowed with determining faculty-he casts off both of these viz., the good action and the bad action. Therefore strive for Yoga; Yoga is proficiency is action.
 By renouncing the fruit, born of action, the intelligent ones endowed with determining faculty and freed from the bond of birth, go to the place that is devoid of illness.
 When your determining faculty goes beyond the impregnable thicket of delusion, at that time you will attain an attitude of futility regarding what has to be heard and what has been heard.
 When your determining faculty, that had been [earlier] confused by your hearing [of scriptural declaration of fruits] shall stand stable in concentration, at that time you shall attain the Yoga.
 Arjuna said O Kesava ! What is the connotation of sthita-prajna (a man-of-stabilized-intellect), [applied] to a man fixed in concentration ? What would sthira-dhih (the fixed-minded) convey ? Where would the fixed-minded abide ? And what would be reach ?
 The Bhagavat said O son of Prtha ! When a man casts off all desires existing in his mind and remains content in the Self by the self (mind), then he is called 'a man-of-stabilized-intellect.
 He, whose mind is undisturbed in the midst of sorrows; who is free from desire in the midst of pleasures; and from whom longing, fear and wrath have totally gone-he is said to be a firm-minded sage.
 He, who has no desire in anything; and who neither rejoices nor hates on getting this or that, good or bad-his intellect is properly stabilized.
 When he withdraws all his sense-organs from sense-objects, just as a tortoise does all of its own limbs, then he is declared to be a man-of-stabilized-intellect.
 Leaving their taste [behind], the sense-objects retreat from the embodied who abstain from food; his taste too disappears when he sees the Supreme.
 For, the turbulent sense-organs do carry away by force, the mind even of this person of discerning, O son of Kunti !
 Restraining them (the same-organs) by mind, the master of Yoga would sit making Me his goal; for, the intellect of that person is stabilized whose sense-organs are under control.
 In a person, meditating on sense-objects, attachment or them is born in succession; from attachment springs passion; from passion arises wrath.
 From wrath delusion comes to be; from delusion is the loss of memory; from the loss of memory is the loss of capacity to decide; due to the loss of capacity to decide, he perishes outright.
 On the contrary, one who moves about (consumes) the sense-objects by means of his senseorgans, that are freed from desire and hatred and are controlled in the Self-such one with a disciplined self (mind) attains serenity [of disposition].
 On attaining serenity, there arises in succession the extinction of all miseries; the capacity to decide gets stabilized soon indeed in the case of a serene-minded one.
 The capacity to decide is not for one who is not a master of Yoga; and concentration of mind is not for one who is not a master of Yoga; and peace is not for one who does not concentrate; wherefrom could happiness come to one who has no peace ?
 That mind, which is directed to follow the wandering (enjoying) sense-organs-that mind carries away his knowledge just as wind does a ship on waters.
 Therefore, O mighty-armed one, the intellect of that person is stabilized, all of whose sense-organs, starting from sense-objects have been well restrained.
 What is night for every [other] being, in that a man of self-restraint is awake; wherein [every other] being is awake, that is night for the sage who sees [the truth].
 Just as waters enter into the ocean which is being filled continuously and which is [yet] firmly established, in the same way, he into whom all objects of desire enter-he attains peace; not he who longs for the objects of desire.
 That person, who, by abandoning all desires, consumes [objects] without longing, without a sense of possession and without egotism-he attains peace.
 O son of Prtha ! This is the Brahmanic state; having attained this, one never gets deluded [again]; and even by remaining in this [for a while] one attains at the time of death, the Brahman, the Tranil One.
