 The Bhagavat said O son of Prtha, hear [from Me] how, having your mind attached to Me, practising Yoga and taking refuge in Me, you shall understand Me fully, without any doubt.
 I Shall teach you this knowledge in full together with action; for a person who has known this there remains in this world nothing else to be known.
 Among thousands of men, perchance, one makes effort for the determined knowledge. Among those, having the determined knowledge-even though they make effort-perchance one realises Me correctly.
 My nature is divided eightfold, such as the Earth, the Water, the Fire, the Wind, the Ether, the Mind, and also the Intellect and the Ego;
 This is the lower [nature of Mine]. Not different from this is My superior nature which has become the individual Soul and by which this world is maintained. O mighty armed (Arjuna), you must know this.
 All beings are born of this womb. Hence keep [them] nearby. I am the origin as well as the dissolution of the entire world.
 There exists nothing beyond Me, O Dhananjaya; all this is strung on Me just as the groups of pearls on a string.
 O son of Kunti ! I am the taste in waters; the light in the moon and the sun; the best hymn (OM) in the entire Vedas; the sound that exists in the ether (or the mystic hymnal sound in the entire Vedas-a sound that is in the ether); and the manly vigour in men.
 I am the pure smell in the earth; I am also the brilliance in the sun; I am the life in al beings and austerity in the ascetics.
 O son of Prtha ! Know Me as the eternal seed of all beings; I am the intellect of the intellectuals and the brillinace of the brilliant.
 Of the strong, I am the strength that is free from desire and attachment. O best of the Bharatas, in [all] beings I am the desire which is not opposed to attributes.
 Whatever beings are there [in the universe]-whether they are of the Sattva or of Rajas or of Tamas (Strands)- be sure that they are from Me; I am not in them, but they are in Me.
 Being duluded by these three beings of the Strands, this entire world does not recognise Me Who am eternal and transcending these [Strands].
 This is My play (daivi), trick-of-Illusion composed of the Strands and is hard to cross over. Those, who resort to Me alone-they cross over the trick-of-Illusion.
 The deluded evil-doers, the vilest men, who are robbed of knowledge by the trick-of-Illusion and have taken refuge in the demoniac nature-they do not resort to Me.
 Men of good action who worship Me always are of four types: the afflicted, the seeker of knowledge, the seeker of wealth and the man of wisdom, O best among the Bharatas !
 Of them, the man of wisdom, being always attached [to Me] with single-pointed devotion excels [others]. For, I am dear to the man of wisdom above all personal gains and he is dear to Me.
 All these are noble persons, indeed. But the man of wisdom is considered as the very Soul of [Mine]. For, with his self (mind) that has mastered the Yoga, he has resorted to nothing but Me as his most supreme goal.
 At the end of many births, one attains Me with the conviction that 'All is Vasudeva' - that noble Soul is very difficult to get.
 Being robbed of their wisdom by innumerable desires [and] being controlled by their own nature, persons take refuge in other deities by following one or the other religious regulations.
 Whatever may be the form [of the deity] a devotee-whosoever he may be-desires to worship with faith, I assume that form which is firm and is according to [his] faith.
 Endowed with that faith, he seeks to worship that deity and therefrom receives his desired objects that are ordained by none but Me.
 But, that fruit of those men of poor intellect is finite. Those, who perform sacrifices, aiming at the gods, go to gods, and My devotees go to Me.
 The men of poor intellect, are not conscious of the higher, changeless and supreme nature of Mine; and hence, they regard Me, the Unmanifest, to be a manifest one.
 Being surrounded by the trick-of-yoga-Illusion, I am not clear to all; [and hence] this deluded world [of perceivers] does not recognise Me, the unborn and the undying.
 O Arjuna, I know the beings that are gone off, that are present and are yet to be born; but no one, knows Me.
 O descendant of Bharata, O scorcher of foes ! At the time of creation, all beings get delusion because of the illusion of pairs [of opposites] arising from desire and hatred.
 But those men of virtuous deeds, whose sin has come to an end-they, being free from the delusion of pairs [of opposites], worship Me with firm resolve.
 Those, who, relying on Me, strive to achieve freedom from old age and death-they realise all to be the Brahman and realise all the actions governing the Self.
 Those who realise Me as one [identical] with what governs the beings, deities and with what governs the sacrifices-they, even at the moment of their journey, experience Me, with their mastering the Yoga.
