Bharata set out for his maternal uncle's house. He took with him the sinless Satrughna who is always successful in destroying foes and on whom he had bestowed his love and affection.
Treated with warm hospitality and fatherly affection by his maternal uncle Aswapati, Bharata stayed on there along with his brother.
Though both the heroic brothers stayed there satisfied on their own they constantly remembered their aged father.
The glorious king Dasaratha also remembered his sons, Bharata and Satrughna, who  were like the great Indra and Varuna, (now) away from home.
Dasaratha, a bull among men, loved all his four sons equally just as the  arms of his own body.
Even among them the brilliant Rama was a source of delight to his father like the Selfborn (Brahma) to all living beings.
Entreated by the devatas desirous of slaying arrogant Ravana, the eternal Visnu was indeed born in the mortal world as Rama.
Kausalya looked splendid with her son, Rama of boundless energy, as did Aditi with the chief of the gods Indra, wielder of thunder.
Endowed with beauty and strengh, free from envy, and in virtues equal to Dasaratha, Rama was verily an incomparable son on earth.
With an unfailing serenity of mind, Rama never paid back harshness with harshness.
Gifted with selfrestraint, Rama was pleased even with a single benefit done somehow to him, yet did not remember even a hundred offences  committed by others.
Even during intervals of  his practice of weapons he never failed to interact with saintly persons and with people advanced in age, virtue and wisdom.
Wise and softspoken, he was the first to speak to others words pleasing to hear. Though mighty, he was never proud of his overwhelming strength.
Rama never told lies. He was a learned man. He honoured elders by going forward to them. He loved his subjects as much as his subjects loved him.
He was kindhearted and compassionate to the distressed, coolheaded and righteous. A worshipper of brahmins he was always selfrestrained and pure in spirit.
He entertained thoughts befitting his (great) dynasty and honoured the code of conduct of a kshatriya. He believed one could attain heavenly abode through his great achievements.
A learned man, he evinced no interest in pursuits that did not contribute to one's welfare or had he any liking for speaking against others. But in debates his oratorical flourish was comparable to Brihaspati's.
He was young, eloquent, healthy and free from disease. He was conscious of (right) time and place (for his pursuits). He was capable of ascertaining the potentiality of men. He was born a sage in this world.
Bestowed with such excellent qualities, the prince (Rama) became a favourite of his subjects.  He was like their vital life outside their bodies.
With the appropriate sacred ablution marking the completion of the vow relating to the respective branches of learning in accordance with tradition, this elder brother of Bharata achieved proficiency in the Vedas and its auxiliary sciences. He surpassed his father in archery.
Born in a family of noble descent, he was saintly. A man without meanness.He was truthful and a man of rectitude. The training he received under aged brahmins conversant with dharma and artha made him welldisciplined.
He knew the true nature of dharma, artha and kama. With a sharp memory,  he was a genius. He was highly skilled in accomplishing tasks related to social practices and customs.
He (Rama) was modest and did not reveal his inner feelings. He counselled in secrecy and had good friends. Never was his anger or pleasure in vain. He knew the occasion  when to sacrifce and when to exercise restraint.
He was firm in his devotion and steady in intellect. He accepted nothing ignoble nor used bad words. He was not swayed by emotions or prone to idleness. He knew his faults as well as of others.
He was versed in scriptures. He was grateful (to those who did him some good) and skilled in differentiating the comparative merits of men. Fair in his judgement he dispensed justice in accordance with law by reprimanding (the delinquent) and favouring (the honest).
He was skilled in  receiving and encouraging the righteous and in punishing (the wicked). He knew  whom to punish. He knew the right means of raising revenue and also expending money in the prescribed manner.
He obtained proficiency in scriptures and interconnected (mutually contradictory) branches of learning. Only after having grasped the (philosophy of) artha (statecraft) and dharma (righteousness), he sought pleasure. He was never indolent.
He had understanding of art and craft useful for entertainment. He knew proper  ways of dispensing wealth. He was experienced in riding elephants and horses and in humbling them.
He was the best among those skilled in archery in this world. He was reckoned as a great wielder of warchariots and one who strikes at the enemies by advancing towards them. He was an expert in commanding troops. (Atiratha is an excellent warrior who can manage his chariot, horses and the charioteer.)
He was incapable of being repressed even by the enraged devatas or rakshasas in the battle. He was free from envy and had subdued his anger and pride. He was never malicious and he never slighted any living being nor did he bow to the pressure of time.
Thus endowed with such excellent qualities, the subjects in the three worlds held him in high esteem. In forbearance he was like the earth, in wisdom like Brihaspati and in prowess like the consort of Sachi (Indra).
Rama whose virtues were cherished by all his subjects was a source of delight to his father and he shone like the rays of the resplendent Sun.
The earth desired him as her lord, for he was bestowed with such avowed virtues and with indomitable prowess equal to all the guardians of the quarters.
Observing his son endowed with such innumerable and incomparable virtues, king Dasaratha, subduer of enemies started thinking.
Thereafter, flashed in the mind of that aged king who had (already) lived long this pleasant thought as to how Rama will become king while he was alive.
The thought of seeing his dear son coronated repeatedly surfaced his mind so great was his affection (for Rama).
(He said to himself) 'his (Rama's) only desire is to promote the prosperity of this world. He is one who shows compassion to all beings and is like the raingod dearer than me to the people of the world'.
'In prowess he is equal to Yama and Indra,in wisdom to Brihaspati and in firmness to a mountain and in virtues greater than me'.
'Seeing my son ruling this entire dominion of the earth, I will experience the bliss of attaining heaven at this age.'
King Dasaratha in consultation with his ministers observed that Rama is endowed  with various virtues not found in other kings, immeasurable virtues which are praiseworthy, and exemplary. He is distinguished in this world as all qualities seem to have merged in him. The king then made up his mind to make him princeregent.
The sagacious king, too perceived his body ageing and the portentous omens in the heaven, in the sky and on the earth causing dreadful concern.
The king realised afterwards that his grief would be dispelled if noble Rama whose countenance resembled the full moon and who was a favourite of the people is crowned.
Longing for it, the noble king realized that the time was ripe for the acceleration of the process of safeguarding his own and his subjects' welfare.
The king did not invite both the kings of Kekaya and Janaka  in  haste with an  intention that they would hear the glad news at a later date.
The king who received them in a befitting manner and provided them with residence and ornaments looked like lord Brahma adorned by the people.
After the king (Dasaratha) who was a tormenter of enemy forces was seated, the rest of the kings beloved of their subjects entered (the assembly hall).
Then  the kings (who entered the assembly) took the seats assigned to them facing the king (Dasaratha), following the royal tradition.
Surrounded by those feudatory kings endowed with modesty, and received with due honour and by the respectful residents of cities and villages, the king (Dasaratha), resembled lord Indra, the thousand eyed encircled by the gods.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे प्रथमस्सर्गः।Thus ends the first sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Thereafter, the lord of the earth (king Dasaratha) addressed the entire assembly of  invitees. He spoke these pleasing words aimed at their welfare which thrilled and delighted the hearts (of the assembled kings):
Lord of men (king Dasaratha) addressed the feudatory kings with words deep, resonant, loud like the kettledrum or the rumbling cloud, in a delightful, incomparable and attractive voice that carried all the dignity of royalty:
It is wellknown to all of you that people of this greatest kingdom were ruled by my predecessors who were great kings, who looked after the subjects as though they were their own children.
I desire to  accomplish the welfare of this entire world which deserves the happiness brought about by the rule of all the Ikshvaku kings.
Following the path of my forefathers I protected the people to the best of my ability by being ever vigilant.
My body has attained old age after ruling the entire world ensuring the welfare of the people under the shade of royal white parasol.
Having lived for thousands of years this body is now worn out  due to old age and therefore I want rest.
I am weary of carrying on the heavy burden of duty and find it difficult to sustain the rule of dharma. It can be shouldered by those who have royal qualities (of might, courage etc) and not by those who have not controlled their senses.
Therefore, after convincing all of you, the best of (learned) brahmins present here, I intend to take rest by installing my son to look after the welfare of the people.
My eldest son Rama, inheriting every virtue of mine, is a conqueror of enemy cities  and is equal to Indra in prowess.
I propose to install him (Rama), foremost among upholders of righteousness and the best of men who resembles the Moon in brightness when in conjunction with Pushya star, as heirapparent to the throne.
With him (Rama) as ruler, all the three worlds will also have a better protector.That elder brother of Lakshmana with signs of greatness is certainly the most befitting to rule this kingdom.
I shall be relieved of my anxiety  by entrusting the land (ruled by me) to my son (Rama) without any more delay and thus ensure the continued welfare of this world.
Although it (this decision) is personally favourable to me and I have decided after seeking good counsel, you should also give me your consent and tell me what I should do.
Although this is what I would like to do, please suggest alternative ways of achieving the welfare (of this kingdom). Deliberations by the unbiased (on this issue) may bring good.
Having thus heard king Dasaratha speak, the kings acclaimed him with delight, like peacocks crying (in joy) to see thick clouds.
There emanated cries of love and joy from the multitude of people (conveying their approval) whose reverberation seemed to shake the palace.
Brahmins, kings and other prominent men, inhabitants of towns and villages  having  fully known the views of Dasaratha who was conversant with artha and dharma  joined together and deliberated. They thought out well and having arrived at unanimity in their thinking thus addressed the aged king Dasaratha.
O mighty king, you have grown many thousands of years old. Therefore, you should coronate Rama as prince regent of this kingdom.
We cherish to see the mightyarmed hero among the Raghus, Rama, riding on a majestic elephant, his countenance shadowed by the royal parasol.
Having heard them king Dasaratha, pretending as though he was not aware of their heart's desire but was now wishing to ascertain it, spoke these words:
O kings, soon after listening to my words, all of you wish Rama to be king. (But) I doubt (in my mind) whether you have said it from your heart৷৷
When the earth is being ruled righteously by me why indeed you intend to see my son as prince regent?
Those kings along with the inhabitants of towns and villages answered the  magnanimous king: O king your son, indeed has many auspicious and admirable  virtues.
O king, we shall now speak about those great virtues of the sagacious (Rama). Comparable to those of the gods, they are dear and a source of delight for every one. Please listen.
Lord of the people Rama with his divine virtues is equal to Indra. He with his  proven valour is exceptional among all the descendents of the Iksvakus.
Devoted to truth and righteousness Rama is the most venerable among men in this world. Even righteousness along with prosperity flows directly from Rama.
He is equal to the Moon in causing happiness to the people, to the earth in forbearance, to Brihaspati in wisdom and to Indra in prowess.
Rama knows the ways of righteousness. He is true to his word and free from envy. He possesses a sound character with forbearance, gentleness and a sense of gratitude. With his senses under control, he is a source of consolation (in stressful times).
This son of the Raghus (Rama) is softspoken, steadfast, always serene, truthful and  free from envy. He is pleasing to all beings. He serves those elderly brahmins versed in many lores. With these virtues his incomparable glory, fame and splendour have steadily grown.
He is an expert in wielding all kinds of weapons available to devas, asuras and  men. He has achieved mastery over all sciences and has appropriately acquired knowledge of the Vedas and its ancillary sciences.
This elder brother of Bharata is the greatest exponent in music on earth. Pious, sagacious, free from meanness, he is of noble descent.
Whenever he, wellinstructed in all matters by the best of brahmins wellversed in dharma and artha proceeds along with Lakshmana to wage a war for the sake of a village or a town, he never returns without conquering the enemy.
While returning from the battlefield, either on a chariot or an elephant Rama stops and  enquires in detail and in order, the welfare of the citizens as he would do for his kith and kin. He enquires about the welfare of their children, sacred  rituals, wives, their servants and disciples as a father would enquire of his sons.
Rama, a tiger among men, always enquires whether our disciples discharge their duties.
He grieves profoundly whenever people are afflicted by misfortunes (and) rejoices like a father on festive occasions.
.He is one who speaks the truth. He is a great archer, one who has conquered his senses and serves the aged. He speaks with a  smile and protects dharma with all his heart.
He helps those who take refuge in him. He is not  interested in conversation leading to  dissentions. But during debates he is eloquent like Brihaspati (establing the truth on the basis of reasoning).
Rama, who is the source of delight to the world, has charming eyebrows and large coppercoloured eyes. He is endowed with heroism, bravery and valour like Visnu manifested.
He is proficient in the ways and means of ruling the people. His senses are not overpowered by passion. He alone is capable of ruling the three worlds, what to speak the earth
His anger or favour never goes in vain. He kills those who rightly deserve to be killed  and flares not at those whose life is to be spared.
When pleased, Rama bestows wealth. Like the Sun shining with his rays, He shines  with his qualities of tranquil, charming and loving nature.
The earth desired to have Rama, richly endowed with such virtues, possessing proven  prowess, comparable to Indra and other regents of the world, as her lord.
O son of the Raghus (Dasaratha), because of  your good  fortune that Rama, endowed with the qualities of an ideal son like Kasyapa to Maricha was born to you for the welfare of this world.
Gandharvas, uragas, devas, asuras, the inhabitants of towns and villages, all men living  in neighbouring or distant regions are wish the illustrious Rama strength, health and long life.
Women, young and old alike devoutly invoke at dusk and at dawn all the gods for the sake of the celebrated Rama.
O Lord let the peoples' prayer be fulfilled by your blessings. We would like to see your son Rama of the complexion of a bluelotus and destroyer of enemies as prince regent.
O bestower of boons it behoves you to install with delight and without delay your son (Rama) endowed with all virtues equal to god of the gods and committed to our wellbeing and to the welfare of this world, as your heirapparent. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्वितीयस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the second sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The citizens held out their palms folded like lotuses in reverence and urged  king Dasaratha in all possible ways (to coronate Rama). He reciprocated their respect with words preasing and beneficial to them:
I am immensely happy that you have added to my incomparable resilience with your  desire to see my beloved eldest son installed heirapparent.
Having honoured them (the invitees) in return for their response, king Dasaratha  addressed Vasistha, Vamadeva and other brahmins.
This auspicious month of Chaitra is sacred with its blossoming groves. Let all the arrangements be made for the installation of Rama as heirapparent. On hearing this, all the members of the assembly applauded the king tumultously.
With the tumult gradually calmed down, the lord of the people, the king (Dasaratha) spoke this to Vasistha, a tiger among ascetics:
O revered one, you should issue appropriate orders to keep ready the necessary articles required for the performance of installation ceremony of Rama.
Hearing the words of  the king, Vasistha, best of the brahmins thus ordered the counsellors who stood in front of the king with folded palms:
By tomorrow early morning arrange in the place set aside for sacred fire in the king's palace gold and other metals, gems, articles of worship, also herbs, garlands of white flowers, roasted corn, honey and clarified butter in separate containers, fresh clothes, chariot, weapons of every kind, army of four divisions, an elephant possessing auspicious marks, white fans made of Yak's hair, a standard, white parasol, a hundred golden vessels shining like fire, a bull with goldplated horns and a tiger skin.
Even the smallest items required be arranged. Let the gates of the inner apartment and of the entire city be decorated with sandalpaste and garlands. Let fragrant incense be burnt for worship.
Arrange fine rice cooked with milk and curd sufficient for a hundred thousand brahmins to eat to their heart's content.
At dawn tomorrow the best of brahmins be honoured with cooked rice clarified butter, curd, roasted corn and gifts in abundance.
As soon as the Sun rises tomorrow, arrangements be made for Swastivachana (a benedictory utterance). Brahmins be invited and seats provided to them.
Banners be fastened and royal highways be sprinkled with water. All  actors and beautifully adorned courtesans should reach the second inner apartment of the king's residence and remain seated there.
Persons to cater food and other eatables and to hold garlands and gifts be stationed at all temples and other places of worship.
Let all the warriors in fresh clothes, armed with long swords and fully alert enter the courtyard of the glorious king.
The two highly selfdisciplined ascetics (Vasistha and Vamadeva), having ordered the tasks to be performed and whatever remained to be done reported to the king.
Satisfied with the arrangements, the two illustrious brahmins(Vasistha and Vamadeva) approached the lord of the earth (Dasaratha) with delight and said All things have been arranged in accordance with your word of command.
Thereafter the glorious king said to Sumantra, Bring immediately the selfpossessed Rama.
In response to the king's command Sumantra, the best of charioteers said, 'so be it'  and fetched Rama in a chariot.
After Sumantra had gone, the kings from eastern, northern, western, southern  nonAryan and Aryan countries, rulers from forests and mountains paid homage to king Dasaratha, as devatas do to Indra.
The rajarsi, (Dasaratha), seated among the kings like Indra amidst maruts, beheld his son Rama sitting in a chariot and approaching him.
Rama appeared as the very image of king of the gandharvas known for his courage in this world. With his long arms, he was extremely handsome with a countenance of the colour of moonstone possessed of immense strength, he walked with the  gait of  an intoxicated elephant. He captivated the eyes and hearts of men with his beauty and generosity. He looked like Parjanya (raingod), gladdening men scorched by heat. Even after (intensely) gazing at Rama approaching, the king (Dasaratha) was not satiated.
Sumantra assisted Rama while alighting from that splendid chariot and followed him  with folded palms as Rama was proceeding towards his father.
Best among men, Rama  accompanied by charioteer Sumantra ascended that palace that was lofty as the peak of Kailasa mountain in order to see the king.
Rama, approached his father with folded palms and bowed low near him, pronounced his (own) name and touched his father's feet with reverence.
Seeing his beloved son Rama who was standing by his side with folded hands in supplication, king Dasaratha, held his folded hands and drew him near and embraced him.
The king (Dasaratha) offered Rama a seat on the lofty, glorious throne splendidly  decorated with gold and gems.
The lofty seat Rama occupied was illuminated by him resplenderce like mount Meru in the translucent rays of the morning Sun.
That assembly was illumined by (the presence of) Rama like the Moon dazzling the clear autumnal sky bespangled with sparkling planets and stars.
The king was delighted to see his beloved son as though he saw his own reflection adorning a mirror.
The best among fathers, he (Dasaratha) said these words to his son with a smile, like Kasyapa addressing Devendra.
A worthy son of my worthy eldest wife, O Rama, your great virtues have endeared you to me.
As you have endeared yourself to these subjects with your virtues, you shall assume the office of heirapparent when Pushya star is in conjunction with the Moon.
Admittedly gentle by nature, you are gifted with virtues. O son, even though virtuous,   I shall offer you counsel for your good out of affection for you.
With humility, always keep your senses under control. Keep off all violations arising out of lust and anger.
With your behaviour keep the ministers and the people satisfied by means direct or indirect.
You shall rule the earth by filling granaries of foodgrains and arsenals and keeping the subjects loyal and contented. The friends of such a person will memain pleased like devatas with nectar. Hence conduct yourself with your mind under control.
Having heard this, Rama's friends quickly reported the matter to Kausalya so that she might be happy.
The foremost of women, Kausalya ordered gifts of gold, cows and various kinds of gems to be given to the messengers who brought this good tiding.
Having paid his obeisance to the king, Rama ascended the chariot amidst the acclaim of multitudes of men and left for his splendid abode.
On hearing such pronouncement by the king, the citizens also felt they have got something beneficial for themselves. They took leave of the king (Dasaratha) and hastening home,  full of joy, began worshipping their gods.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे तृतीयस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the third sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
After the citizens departed, the king, an expert in decisionmaking again consulted his counsellors and said, Tomorrow Pushya star is in the ascendence and my son, Rama (handsome) with coppercoloured eyes which resemble red lotus petals will be installed heirapparent.
Therafter king Dasaratha on retiring to his private apartment, ordered Sumantra to bring Rama  once again.
In obedience to the command  of the king charioteer Sumantra set out speedily  to the palace of Rama to fetch him  back once again.
The doorkeepers informed Rama of Sumantra's arrival. As soon as he learnt that Sumantra was back again, Rama was filled with apprehensions.
Rama  got Sumantra admitted  and said to him, What is the  purpose of your coming back so quickly ? Tell me whatever is there without holding back.
Then Sumantra replied, 'The king desires to see you. To go or not to go, the decision is yours'.
On hearing the words of the charioteer, Rama immediately set out for the royal  palace to see the king again.
Having heard of Rama's arrival, king Dasaratha got him admitted into his apartment to tell him something very pleasant.
On entering his father's palace, glorious Rama, folded his hands and bent low in reverence from a distance and beheld his father.
As he (Rama) was bending (with reverence), Dasaratha lifted him up and embraced him. Thereafter, he offered him a splendid seat and said again:
O Rama after a long life I have grown old. I have enjoyed all the pleasures I desired. I have also performed hundreds of rituals which enjoined distribution of abundant food and gifts.
O best of men I have obtained now a progeny of my liking in you and you have no equal on earth. I have given gifts, performed rituals and also studied (the Vedas) .
O mighty son I have experienced all the pleasures I longed for. I redeemed my debt to the gods, the sages, my ancestors, brahmins and to myself.
There is nothing left to be done by me except your consecration Hence you should perform what I  tell you.
Today  all the subjects expresed their desire to see you as their king. Therefore, my dear son, I wish to coronate  you heirapparent.
Moreover Rama, these days I see frightening and ominous events in dreams during day time. I see meteors accompanied by thunders falling, generating great sounds.
O Rama astrologers also tell me that formidable planets Sun, Mars and Rahu have afflicted my birth star.
When such ominous signs appear, usually the king either meets with  death or faces a grave calamity.
Therefore,  before my mind is deluded I wish to see you installed as heirapparent for a man's mind is unstable indeed, O Rama.
Today the Moon is in conjunction with the Punarvasu constellation. Tomorrow the  Moon's conjunction with the Pushya constellation is certain and the astrologers say this auspicious time is highly suitable for the purpose of coronation.
My mind is hastening me saying,'Coronate  Rama in the Pushya constellation itself'. O Slayer of enemies, I shall install you heirapparent tomorrow.
Therefore, you and my daughterinlaw (Sita) should fast tonight and sleep on a bed of darbha or kusha grass with selfrestraint.
Many impediments befall  acts of this sort indeed. Alert your friends to protect you  from all sides today onwards.
While Bharata is away from the city, the time is favourable for your installation. This is my opinion.
It is true, your brother Bharata has adhered to the path of the virtuous and has followed his elder brother. No doubt, he is righteous, compassionate and self controlled.
Yet I think even the propitious minds of those who are virtuous and whose thoughts are fixed in righteousness can also become fickle.
Having spoken to Rama about the installation ceremony fixed for the next day, he (Dasaratha) permitted him to leave saying, 'You may go'. Rama paid obeisance to his father and returned to his abode.
With the installation fixed by the king, Rama went into his residence but left immediately to see his mother in her inner apartment.
There he beheld his mother in silk apparel engrossed in silent prayer (to the gods) for his royal fortune in the room meant for the worship of the gods.
Hearing the welcome tidings of the installation of her beloved Rama, Sita too, had been brought in. Sumitra and Lakshmana had already arrived there.
At that moment Kausalya was meditating with her eyes halfclosed. Sumitra, Lakshmana and Sita were attending on her.
Having heard that installation of her son as heirapparent was planned in Pushya constellation, Kausalya was meditating upon the Supreme Person, Lord Visnu by controlling her breath (Pranayama).
While she (Kausalya) was in that state of meditation, Rama approached her, offered reverential salutation and said these words of praise enhancing her joy:
O mother father has assigned me the duties of governing the subjects. My installation takes place tomorrow on my father's command.
Tonight, Sita, the officiating priests and preceptors will take to fasting along with me. This is what father told me.
The installation takes place tomorrow. Perform today whatever auspicious rituals are appropriate (to the occasion) for me and Vaidehi (Sita).
Hearing this long cherished tiding (relating to installation) Kausalya spoke to Rama in sweet but indistinct words due to tears of joy.
O my dear child, O Rama, may you live long Let your enemies be destroyed. Endowed with prosperity, bring delight to my relatives and those of Sumitra.
O Rama, my little child you were born to me under a lucky star. On this account you have delighted your father Dasaratha with your virtues. What a joy
O my son my devotion to the lotuseyed Visnu, enduring the pain (of observance of vows and fasting) have not gone in vain.The royal fortune of the Ikshvakus will pass on to  you. What a joy
Thus spoken to by his mother, Rama looked at his brother Lakshmana sitting humbly with folded palms and with a smile said to him:
O Lakshmana rule this earth together with me. This royal fortune also accrues to you, for you are my second innermost self.
O, son of Sumitra, enjoy all pleasures you wish and the fruits of royalty. I desire  this life and kingdom for your sake only.
After speaking to Lakshmana, Rama made reverential salutation to the two mothers and on obtaining their consent to leave with Sita, returned to his abode.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुर्थस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fourth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The king having instructed Rama summoned Vasistha, the priest and spoke to him about the coronation that was to take place on the following day
Could you, O sage, whose wealth is asceticism go to Rama engaged in strict observance of vows and advise him along with Sita, my daughterinlaw to undertake fast for securing prosperity, fame and kingdom.
Venerabel Vasistha, the best amongst the knowers of the Vedas, skilled in mantras and firm in his vows said to the king, 'Be it so.' Thereafter,  mounted on the best of the chariots befitting a brahmin, with horses harnesed he proceeded personally to the abode of Rama to ask him to undertake a fast in accompaniment with mantras preceding the installation ceremony.
Having crossed the three courtyards in the chariot, that foremost of ascetics (Vasistha) entered Rams's abode, shining like a mass of white clouds.
Seeing the venerable sage(Vasitha) arrive, Rama quickly came out of his abode in great excitement to receive him with honour.
Hastening with rapid strides, Rama approached the chariot of the sagacious Vasistha and personally helped him alight from the chariot.
The family priest Vasistha also, having gratified him by enquiring about his welfare, said thus to Rama, who was humble and lovable:
O Rama, welldisposed towards you, your father will declare you heirapparent. Do undertake fast today, along with Sita.
Your father, king Dasaratha, will be pleased to coronate you as heirapparent early tomorrow morning as Nahusa did (to his son) Yayati.
The ascetic (Vasistha) having thus spoken to Rama made him undertake fast along with Sita in accompaniment with sacred hymns.
Thereafter, Vasistha, preceptor of the king duly honoured by the descendant of Kakutstha (Rama) left his abode.
Rama also sat for a while in the company of his sweettongued friends and duly  honoured by them in every way took  leave  of them and entered his apartment.
The residence of Rama, full of cheerful men and women, looked  splendid like a lake with fullblown  lotuses flocked by multitudes of intoxicated birds.
Vasistha thereafter emerged from the abode of Rama resembling a royal palace and beheld the highways filled with people.
The royal highways in the city of Ayodhya were jammed on all sides with groups of curious people.
The highways resembled the sea and the exultation of the multitudes, the roar that emanated from the clashing of waves.
On that day, the thoroughfares of the city of Ayodhya, surrounded with (pleasure) gardens, were sprinkled with water and swept. The flags (on the top) of the houses were raised high.
Then all the people living in Ayodhya including women, children and aged alike  wishing to see the coronation  of Rama eagerly waited for the  sunrise.
People were anxious to witness that great festival of Ayodhya which was to them (precious) like an ornament and a source of immense joy.
The priest (Vasistha), beholding the overcrowded highway forced his passage through the crowds of men dividing them into two tracts and slowly entered the royal palace.
Having ascended the royal palace resembling the peak of a mountain covered with white clouds, Vasistha approached the king like  Brihaspati meeting Indra.
On seeing Vasistha the king descended from the throne and enquired whether he had performed the mission to which the ascetic replied affirmatively.
All those present in the assembly with him (the king) also got up from their seats as he (Dasaratha) did and paid their obeisance to Vasistha.
The king then, dully permitted by the preceptor, disposed the assembly of men and stepped into his inner apartment, like a lion entering the cave of a mountain.
The king entered the inner apartment thronged with excellently attired women which looked like the palace of Mahendra. He resembled the beautiful Moon that illuminates the sky crowded with stars.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fifth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
With the family priest (Vasistha) gone, Rama had his bath, and with his mind under control came to Lord Narayana along with his largeeyed consort, Sita. (with an intention to worship him)
Then holding the vessel containing havis on his head, he offered the oblations of  clarified butter into the sacred fire for Visnu in accordance with ritual practices.
The son of the king (Rama) partook the remainder of the havis seeking his own welfare. With a restrained mind and a vow of silence, he meditated upon Lord Narayana and slept along with Vaidehi on a wellspread bed of kusha grass in the auspicious temple of lord Visnu.
He got up (Rama) with one yama (three hours) of the night still left, and had his entire  residence decorated.
Then (in the last watch of the night) hearing the pleasant words of bards and panegyrists he attended to early morning rites and intoned Gayatri with a concentrated mind.
Clad in spotless silk garments, he extoled Lord Madhusudana (Visnu) with his head bowed low. He listened to the purificatory mantras recited by brahmins.
And then the deep and sweet proclamations of 'This is an auspicious day' mingled with the sounds of trumpets reverberated (the city of) Ayodhya.
The residents of Ayodhya were happy to hear that the scion of the Raghus (Rama) along with princess of Videha (Sita) had undertaken the fast.
Having heard about the coronation of Rama, all the citizens began to decorate the city soon after daybreak.
Banners of varying colours and flags were raised on the temples looking resplendent like peaks wreathed by a mass of white clouds, at the crossroads, on the thoroughfares, on the trees standing on avenues, on the towers and stalls of the merchants abounding in various kinds of merchandise, on prosperous and graceful houses of householders, in all public halls and on trees looking tall from a distance.
Troupes of actors and dancers entertained the people with songs pleasing to the mind and ears and their utterances were heard here and there.
As the time for Rama's coronation was approaching, men in public squares and in private houses talked with one another about the consecration of Rama.
Similarly children playing in groups in front of the houses also related to each other  stories regarding the coronation of Rama.
On the occasion of Rama's coronation the highway, strewn with flowers and rendered fragrant with the burning of incense by the citizens looked glorious.
In the same way lest night should fall (by the time the installation ceremony was completed), the streets were provided with lamps in the shape of trees to light them up.
Thus the residents of Ayodhya decorated the city and eagerly waited for Rama's cornonation as heirapparent. Gathered in groups at public squares and in the assembly halls they conversed among themselves about the event, praising Dasaratha, the lord among men.
Oh having realised that he himself has grown old the highsouled king Dasaratha the veritable delight to the Ikshvaku race,  is going to coronate Rama in the kingdom.
All of us are fortunate indeed that Rama who knows the world's high and low shall be our king, protector for a long time.
This scion of the Raghus (Rama) is free from arrogance, is learned, righteous and affectionate towards his brothers as much as towards us.
May the virtuous and sinless king Dasaratha live long by whose grace we are beholding (going to behold) Rama's coronation.
Having heard about the coronation of Rama, villagers arrived from all directions and listened to the citizens conversing in this manner.
The city was filled with villagers coming from different directions to behold Rama's coronation.
The multitudes of men moving to and fro gave rise to a noise like the roar of the ocean enhanced by the violent speed (of the wind) on the full and new moon days.
The city (of Ayodhya), resembling the abode of Indra, (Amaravati) crowded with villagers from all over wishing to witness it (the coronation of Rama), grew noisy and sparkled like the water of the ocean teeming with aquatic animals.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षष्ठस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The family maid (Manthara) of Kaikeyi who had been living with her since her (Kaikeyi's) birth casually ascended the palace gleaming white like the Moon.
Manthara beheld from that palace the whole of Ayodhya with its highways sprinkled with water and strewn with a lot of flowers.
The city of Ayodhya was decorated with costly banners and pennants. The labyrinthine roads were crowded with people who had (finished) their headbath and were wandering at will. The temples with their doors painted white were reverberating with the chanting from the Vedas by the best of brahmins holding garlands and sweetmeats in their hands and with sounds of   all kinds of musical instruments. The city was filled with spirited horses and elephants. The bulls were bellowing and the cows were lowing. The citizens with great joy raised the penants encircling the city of Ayodhya. All this left Manthara astonished.
Seeing a royal  maid clad in white silk garment and standing not very far with her eyes expanded in delight Manthara enquired:
Why is Rama's mother, forever interested in the accumulation of money gifting away her wealth to men with great joy?
Why do the people look exceedingly happy? Tell me, what the king with great delight is proposing to do?
Bursting with great joy, the royal maid related to the hunchback the great fortune awaiting the son of the Raghus (Rama).
Tomorrow under the spell of the Pushya star, king Dasaratha will consecrate blameless Rama born in the race of Raghu as heirapparent (the maid said).
Having heard these words of the royal maid, the hunchback became furious and speedily descended from that palace resembling the peak of mount Kailasa.
The malevolent Manthara on fire with fury reached Kaikeyi lying upon her couch  and said:
O senseless one, why are you lying down? Get up A great fear is gripping you. Why don't you realise that you are floating in a sea of perils.
Though you appear to be your husband's darling, in reality he dislikes you. The good fortune you boast of indeed is unstable like the stream of a river in summer.
At these harsh words of the furious, evileyed hunchback Kaikeyi   fell into great despondency.
Kaikeyi said to the hunchback, O Manthara isn't all well with you? I can mark it from your dejected face how greatly distressed you feel, indeed.
Hearing the words of Kaikeyi uttered in a gentle voice, wrathful Manthara skilled in speech, said:
That hunchback feeling still more depressed in her (Kaikeyi's) interest and intending to cause in her despondency and distance Rama from her spoke out:
O queen, your end is approaching, and it has no end and it is overwhelming. King Dasaratha is crowning Rama as heirapparent.
Plunged in unfathomable fear and stricken with grief and tears I am here seeking your wellbeing and yet consumed as though by fire.
O Kaikeyi, your sorrow will augment my sorrow. Your prosperity would mean my prosperity. There is no doubt about this.
O queen, born in the royal family and being a king's consort why don't you realise the ruthless ways of statecraft?
Your husband speaks morals publicly but in private he is deceitful. He speaks gently  but acts cruelly. Because of your innocent nature you are  beguiled by him. You do not understand this.
When your husband approaches you he swears in meaningless, appeasing words. But today he is going to bestow benefit on Kausalya only.
That evilminded one, having sent Bharata away to your relations house, is going to install Rama unhindered in the kingdom at dawn tomorrow.
O innocent lady with the intention of doing good like a mother to your husband who is your enemy, you are holding on your lap a venomous serpent.
King Dasaratha has done to you and to your son the same thing as a  snake or an enemy would do when ignored.
O senseless lady, you are always accustomed to comfort. With deceitful words of appeasement that vicious one (King Dasaratha) is going to install Rama in the kingdom. You along with your son have been surely ruined.
O enchantingeyed Kaikeyi, that appropriate time has come. Act quickly for your own wellbeing. Save yourself, your son and me too.
Hearing the words of Manthara, Kaikeyi of charming countenance lying in her couch rose, full of joy, like the autumnal streak of the Moon's crescent.
Filled with immense joy and wonder (at the news), Kaikeyi gifted a beauthful ornament to that hunchback.
Kaikeyi, the best among the beauties, having given the ornament to Manthara, the hunchback, looked at her and said these words again:
O Manthara, the news you have brought me is exceedingly pleasant. What more can I do for you? Here is the gift for one who brings good tidings.
I do not see any distinction between Rama and Bharata as such. I am contented with Rama's consecration in the kingdom.
O woman worthy of affection for me there is nothing greater and dearer than this news. I will grant you another reward better than this. Just ask for it.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventh sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the  holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Annoyed with Kaikeyi and filled with rage and sorrow, Manthara discarded the ornament (gifted to her) and said these words:
O foolish woman why do you display this misplaced happiness, little realising that you are in the midst of an ocean of sorrow?
O queen at a time when this great misfortune has befallen you, you are rejoicing instead of feeling miserable. I am indeed laughing at you at heart.
I pity your false notion. Will any wise woman rejoice at the prosperity of the son of a cowife who is like an enemy? This is like (courting) death.
Since Bharata and Rama have equal claim to the kingdom, Bharata is a  source of fear for Rama. Having thought over this matter, I am dejected. Danger springs from one who is in fear.
Lakshmana who wields a great bow has taken refuge with all his heart in Rama a descendant of Kakutstha dynasty. So does Satrughna in Bharata.
O beautiful lady in order of birth, too, Bharata's right to the throne is just next (to  Rama's). While being younger, the chances of the other two (Lakshmana and Satrughna) are remote.
Rama is learned in the duties of a kshatriya. He is wise enough to do what he should at the appropriate time. While reflecting the fate of your son, I am trembling with fear.
Kausalya whose son is going to be coronated as heirapparent by eminent   brahmins under Pushya  star tomorrow is fortunate, indeed.
With folded palms like an attendant, you will have to serve that renowned Kausalya who is greatlly delighted by getting rid of her enemies.
If you thus become her attendant along with us, your son will also develop slavishness towards Rama.
All the women of Rama's (palace) will be delighted indeed. With the decline of Bharata, your daughtersinlaw will be deprived of all happiness.
Having seen that morose Manthara speaking thus, Kaikeyi commended the virtues of Rama.
Rama knows righteouness. He has been taught selfrestraint by elders. He is grateful and truthful. He is undefiled. He is the eldest son of the king. Therefore, he deserves to be the heirapparent (of the kingdom).
Blessed with a long life, Rama will protect his brothers and the servants like a father. O hunchback, hearing Rama's coronation why are you aggrieved?
After a hundred years of Rama's rule, Bharata, the best of men, will get the kingdom of his ancestors.
Manthara, we have enjoyed prosperity in the past, we are enjoying it now and we will enjoy it in future. Then why are you aggrieved?
For me, if Bharata is worthy of consideration Rama is worthier. He serves me even more (scrupulously) than he does Kausalya.
If the kingdom is Rama's, it is also Bharata's, since Rama regards his brothers as his own self
Having heard Kaikeyi's words Manthara was extremely unhappy. Heaving deep, hot sighs she said to Kaikeyi.
You are sinking in the sea of sorrow widened with tears and troubles. But you are stupid enough not to perceive your own wellbeing.
Rama, the scion of the Raghus, will become king. After Rama, his son will suceed him. O Kaikeyi, as for  Bharata, he will be debarred from royal succession (altogether).
O lovely lady, not all the sons of the king will inherit the kingdom. If all of them are installed as kings, there will be great disorder.
O Kaikeyi of beautiful limbs, for that reason kings bestow the governance of the kingdom either on the eldest or on other virtuous sons.
O (Kaikeyi) dear cut off from royal succession as well as from its comforts, your son will become totally forlorn and brokenhearted.
I am here to serve your interest. Nevertheless you do not understand me and you wish to confer gifts on me on the occasion of the prosperity of your cowife.
Rama, having secured the thornless kingdom, will banish Bharata from the country or else send him to the other world. This is certain.
Bharata has been sent by you right from his childhood to his maternal uncle's house.  Proximity creates friendship even amongst the inanimate objects.
Satrughna who is obedient to Bharata has followed him. Like Lakshmana who has taken refuge in Rama, he has also resorted to Bharata.
It is said that a tree intended to be cut down by those living on the forest is let off   due to entanglement of a kind of grass known as Ishika (thorny bushes) growing in its vicinity. (If Bharata had been at Ayodhya now, Dasaratha himself would have helped him.
Just as Lakshmana protects Rama, Rama protects Lakshmana. Their brotherhood is renowned in the world like that of the Ashwins.
Rama will do no harm to Lakshmana. As for Bharata, Rama will doubtless do him harm.
Therefore let your son go to the forest straight from his uncle's palace only. That alone will please me. For you also this is highly beneficial.
If Bharata secures the ancestral kingdom righteously, it will bring welfare to you and to your relations also.
Your son, that young Bharata, is accustomed to comforts. He is a born enemy of Rama. How will he, deprived of all wealth, live under the control of Rama?
Like the leader of an elephantherd attacked by a lion in the forest, Bharata is going to be oppressed by Rama. You should save him.
Being fortunate (being the favourite wife of your husband) you slighted your cowife  earlier with pride. How will she, Rama's mother (Kausalya) remain without retaliating?
O lovely lady when Rama becomes the lord of this earth with its oceans, mountains and cities, then along with Bharata you will become miserable and fall into disgrace.
When Rama obtains this earth, Bharata will be certainly ruined. Therefore, right now think of the kingdom for your son and the means of banishment for your enemy, Rama.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eighth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Thus spoken to, Kaikeyi, her face burning with anger, breathed a deep, hot sigh and said these words to Manthara:
Today I shall at once banish Rama from here into the forest and get Bharata coronated as heirapparent without delay.
O Manthara now see, for sure, Bharata and not Rama will get the kingdom by any means.
Thus addressed by queen Kaikeyi, that evil minded Manthara said this to Kaikeyi  in order to spoil the interest of Rama:
O Kaikeyi, what a joy I shall now tell you how your son Bharata alone will secure the kingdom. Listen to me:
O Kaikeyi, don't you remember in your own interest what I'm going to tell you or are you hiding it, wishing to hear from me?
O lovely Kaikeyi if it pleases you to hear from me, I shall tell you. Listen and think over it, too.
After hearing Manthara's words, Kaikeyi got up a little from her wellspread bed and said this:
O Manthara, tell me the means by which Bharata and not Rama will secure the kingdom in any circumstances.
Thus addressed by the queen (Kaikeyi), the evileyed hunchback, Manthara, said with the intention to damage Rama's interest.
O queen during the war between gods and asuras, your husband went with royal saints intending to render assistance to Indra, king of the gods, taking you along with him. He set off in the southern direction of Dandaka forest to a renowned city called Vaijayanta where asura Timidhvaja lived.
That mighty asura wellknown as Sambara, capable of a hundred deceitful forms, challenged Indra to a battle which could not be conquered by hosts of gods.
In that great battle, the rakshasas used to kill by force the warriors wounded by the weapons and those fast asleep during the night.
There in that great battle the mightyarmed king Dasaratha lay wounded with weapons (used) by the asuras.
O queen you had protected your husband by carrying him away from the battlefield when he lost his consciousness. He was saved by you. Once again you saved him when he lay wounded with weapons (hurled) by the asuras.
O auspiciouslooking one out of gratitude he had granted two boons to you (for saving him on two occasions). O queen then you told your husband that whenever you desire, you will ask for those boons. The magnanimous king said, 'So be it'.
O queen I did not know this indeed. Only you had related it to me earlier. Because of my affection towards you, I have retained it in my memory. (Now) prevent preparations for Rama's consecration by force.
Ask your husband for those two boons namely consecration of Bharata and banishment  of Rama for fourteen years.
If Rama is banished into the forest for fourteen years your son will be firmly established in the kingdom by  affectionately winning the hearts of  the people.
O Kaikeyi ,daughter of Ashwapati enter now the chamber of wrath like one in angry mood, wearing soiled garments and lie down on the bare ground.
Immersed in grief and in tears, neither look at him (Dasaratha) nor even talk to him when you see him.
No doubt, you have always been a beloved wife to your husband. For your sake the great king will even enter into the burning fire.
The king is afraid of inciting your ire. When you are angry, he dare not look at your indignant countenance. Indeed he will forsake even his life for your pleasure.
The king would not dare transgress your words. O wicked woman, recognise the power of your beauty.
King Dasaratha may give you gems, pearls, gold and different kinds of precious stones. Do not pay them any attention.
O fortunate Kaikeyi, make him recollect the two boons he had granted you in the war between gods and demons. You should not ignore your objective.
When Dasaratha personally lifts you from the floor and  asks  you what you want  you may make him settle down and ask him for these boons:
'O best of kings exile Rama into the forest for fourteen years and make Bharata king of the land'.
After Rama has been exiled into the forest for fourteen years your son grown strong and deeprooted will remain (king) for the rest of his life.
O Devi demand Rama's exile as a boon. O lovely queen this way all the interests of your son will be fulfilled (protected).
Thus, if Rama is exiled he will no longer be Rama (be able to cause delight to the people). Bharata will become king  with his enemy subdued.
By the time Rama returns from the forest, your son (now) confident, would have become deep rooted by gaining the company of friends and the acceptability of the people.
I think the proper time has come (to ask for the boons). Without fear refrain the king forcibly from his intention of installing Rama.
Thus, having been made to accept the evil design as a beneficial objective, Kaikeyi  understood (the entire matter) and in delight spoke to Manthara.
That Kaikeyi, even though endowed with sound foresight, expressed her sense of wonder at the words of the hunchback and chose a wrong path like a young (immature) girl.
(She said) O hunchback, I never knew that you can speak such excellent words or decide  things intelligently. You are the best among the hunchbacks of this world.
O hunchback you alone always show interest in my affairs and seek my welfare. I might not have known the intended (deceptive) action of the king (without you).
There are many hunchbacks in this world, terribly ugly with their bodies misshaped and crooked. But you look beautiful like a lotus bent by the breeze.
Your breasts are thick and are as high as your shoulders. Beneath them lies your belly with its beautiful navel (waist) looking slender as if out of bashfulness.
You have full hips, round and plump breasts. Your countenance equals the bright moon. How passionate you look, Manthara
Your hips, glitter with the jingling girdle. Strong are the  calfs of your legs and long are your feet.
O Manthara when clad in silk garment you walk in front of me with your heavy thighs, you look like a female royal swan.
In you reside a thousand deceitful means more than all the thousand mayas (tricks) of Sambara, king of the asuras, was capable of.
Your clever thoughts, magic powers and also the skills of kshatriyas are stored in your huge hump which is as wide as the hub of a chariot wheel.
O hunchback, with Rama gone to the forest and Bharata consecrated, I shall drape this hump with a golden garland.
O Manthara, when my objective is accomplished and I am fully satisfied, I will smear your hump with the best of refined liquid gold.
O Manthara, I shall get a tilaka made of gold for your auspicious, lovely face and shall also order exquisite ornaments (for you).
You shall move about wearing lovely garments like a goddess. With a peerless countenance, as if challenging the Moon and feeling proud, you will attain a state of eminence amidst your enemies.
Other hunchbacks adorned with all sorts of ornament shall also serve you in the same manner as you are serving me.
Flattered in this manner, Manthara addressed Kaikeyi who was lying on a white couch and looking like a flaming fire on the sacrificial altar:
O fortunate one construction of a dike is not undertaken after the water has flowed down. Act before the king to the best of your interest.
That beautiful, largeeyed Kaikeyi, puffed with the pride of her intoxicating beauty, encourged and influenced by the words of that hunchback, entered the chamber of wrath. She cast off her highly precious pearl necklace worth many hundreds of thousands (of rupees) and other costly, beautiful ornaments. Thereafter that goldenhued Kaikeyi lay down on the floor and said to Manthara:
O hunchback, tell the king, either Bharata shall secure the kingdom on Rama's departure to the forest or else I will die here.
I do not aspire for gold, nor gems nor ornaments. If Rama is installed, that will be the end of my life.
Addressing queen Kaikeyi, the mother of Bharata, with extremely powerful words, that hunchback again made these utterances beneficial to Bharata and detrimental to Rama:
It is true that if Rama secures this kingdom, you along with your son are bound to suffer. O auspicious one, hence act in a way your son Bharata will be installed.
Repeatedly struck down by that hunchback's arrowsharp words greatly grieved queen Kaikeyi was inflamed against the king. Laying her hands on the chest again and again and expressing her amazement, she praised that hunchback.
Tell the king that he will see either the fulfilment of Bharata's desire after Rama is banished into the forest for a long period or me gone to Yama's abode.
If Rama does not go from here to the forest, I want neither a bed nor garlands nor sandalpaste nor unguents nor food nor water nor even life.
Saying these ruthless words, that lovely Kaikeyi cast off all her ornaments like a fallen  'kinnara' woman, and lay down on the floor with the carpet removed.
Thus queen Kaikeyi's face enveloped by the darkness of violent anger and her body stripped of all valuable ornaments, she lay restless, looking like the dark sky without stars. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे नवमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends of the ninth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Perversely advised by the extremely sinful hunchback the queen (Kaikeyi) lay down on the ground like a kinnari struck as though by a poisonous arrow.
The intelligent, beautiful lady (Kaikeyi), having correctly decided the strategy in her mind, slowly unfolded everything to Manthara.
That beautiful wretch (Kaikeyi) impressed by the words of Manthara heaved deep, hot sighs like a female serpent and  thought for a while about the means of bringing happiness to herself.
Manthara, Kaikeyi's friend, too, driven by a strong desire to fulfil her resolve was highly pleased and on hearing the firm determination of Kaikeyi, felt as if the accomplishment of the objective was at hand.
Then Kaikeyi finally took a firm decision. With a soiled body and a frowning face she lay down on the floor.
Thereafter Kaikeyi flung away her multicoloured garlands along with her costly ornaments on to the ground.
All the garlands and ornaments she scattered adorned the floor like the stars (illumining) the sky.
Tightly fastening her hair into a single braid and wearing soiled clothes, she lay down in the chamber of wrath in a lifeless state like a kinnari.
The king issued orders for Rama's installation ceremony, and taking leave of his close associates entered the palace.                        .
Aware of the fact that Rama's installation ceremony was known to everybody by then he who had subdued his senses entered the inner apartment to convey it to one worthy of such pleasant news.
The illustrious king entered the excellent abode of Kaikeyi like the Moon entering the mouth of Rahu in a sky overcast with pale clouds.
The maharaja entered the inner apartment of Kaikeyi's prosperous abode filled with parrots and peacocks, reverberating with cries of kraunchas and swans and sounds of musical instruments attended with hunchbacks and dwarfs decorated with champak and ashoka trees, bowers surrounded with creepers, picturegalleries, altars and sofas embellished with ivory, gold and silver. It was shining with pools and trees bearing flowers and fruits in all seasons. Various kinds of food, drinks and eatables were kept ready. With excellent decorations that abode of Kaikeyi resembled heaven. (But) the king did not see his beloved Kaikeyi in her best bed.
Charged with passion and seeking carnal pleasure, the king became dejected when he did not see his beloved wife. He enquired about her.
Never before had queen Kaikeyi missed his time of arrival. Nor had the king ever entered her empty apartment.
Having entered her apartment, the king, unaware of that foolish Kaikeyi's selfish design enquired her whereabouts as usual.
Thereafter, the frightened doorkeeper with folded palms said O monarch the queen in a hot mood has rushed into the chamber of wrath.
Hearing the words of the doorkeeper, the melancholic king grieved all the more with his senses agitated and unstable.
The lord of the earth (Dasaratha) saw her (Kaikeyi) lying down on the floor of the chamber of wrath in an unbecoming manner and felt as if consumed by grief.
The guileless, old king beheld his youthful wife who was dearer to him than his own life, filled with deceitful  intentions. She looked like a severed creeper, like a goddess fallen down, like a 'Kinnari' thrown down on earth, like an 'apsarasa' slipped from heaven, like an illusion torn, like a female deer tied down.
Like a mighty sheelephant caressing her cow wounded with a poisoned arrow in the forest, he caressed her lovingly.
With a mind extremely terrified yet passionate, he caressed his lotuseyed wife with his hands, and said:
O auspicious queen, I do not know whether your anger is directed at me. I do not know the cause of your anger. By whom have you been offended or disrespected? Why are you lying in the dust? This is causing me great sorrow.
While I am here favourably disposed towards you, why are you lying down on the floor like one possessed by an evil spirit? Why are you afflicting my mind?
O lovely one there are, to my best satisfaction, expert physicians in all branches (of medical science). They will restore your health. Tell me your ailment.
On whom do you wish to bestow favour? Who has caused you displeasure? To whom should I grant favour now? To whom should I cause great displeasure?
O queen shed no tears. Drain not your health. Ask me, and I shall slay one who should not be slain or release one who should be slain. I shall make a poor man rich and a wealthy man poor. (Tell me who are such people).
My kins and I are under your control. I will make no effort to go even a little  against your wishes.
If you want to do anything even if it means sacrificing my life, I shall do it. Since you know my strength, it does not behove you to doubt me. I swear on my  merits. I will do whatever pleases you.
My authority on the land is extended till such places the wheel of any chariot rotates such as the regions in the east, SindhuSauvira areas, Saurashtra, Southern regions, Banga, Anga, Magadha states, Matsya kingdom and KasiKosala countries which are prosperous places.
There wealth and foodgrains, sheep and goats and many things are produced. O Kaikeyi, ask whichever of these you wish.
O lady why do you exert yourself? Arise, arise. O charming Kaikeyi, tell me the cause of your fear. I will dispel it just as the Sun dispels morning mists.
Thus spoken to, she (Kaikeyi) breathed a sigh of relief. Intending to tell him the unpleasant thing (which was in her mind), she began tormenting her husband all the more.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे दशमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends  the tenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
To the ruler of the earth (the king), struck by the darts of Kamadeva and overtaken by passion Kaikeyi spoke (these) dreadful words.
O king I have neither been offended nor disregarded by any one, but I have a purpose which you should fulfil.
If you are inclined to accomplish my desire, then promise me that you will fulfil them. Thereafter I shall reveal it to you.
The mighty king steeped in passion gently held Kaikeyi's hair in his hands  and with a clear, bright smile said:
O proud lady, don't you know there exists for me no woman dearer than you and      no man other than Rama who is the best among men.
I swear in the name of the scion of the Raghu dynasty, the invincible, broadminded Rama, the best among men worthy of long life. Tell me what you have in mind.
O Kaikeyi, in the name of Rama without seeing whom I, for sure, cannot live a momment, I swear I will fulfil your desire.
O Kaikeyi I wish the best among men Rama well.Even at the expense of my life or the lives of the rest of my sons I swear in his name I shall fulfil your wish.
O gentle lady my heart is sinking. Touch my heart and deliver me from distress. O Kaikeyi considering all this, tell me what you think is good.
You know fully the authority you wield over me. Therefore, it does not behove you to doubt me. I swear on my acquired merits that I shall do whatever pleases you.
Bent upon her interests, the queen cheered and expressed in unutterable words her premeditated  wish which had no alternative.
Delighted by the words (of the king), Kaikeyi disclosed him her highly dreadful wish which entered her mind like a sudden visitation of death:
You are repeatedly swearing to grant me boons. Let the thirtythree crore gods headed by  the firegod, listen.
Let the Moon and the Sun, the sky, the planets, night and day, the (ten) quarters the world, gandharvas, rakshasas, this earth, the nocturnal spirits all beings, family deities of every house and all other beings listen to your words of promise.
King Dasaratha who is true to his vows, heroic and knows the ways of righteousness is granting me boons with a wellcomposed mind. Let all the gods  stand witness to this (declared Kaikeyi).
Clasping the great archer, the infatuated king, conferer of boons and flattering him (to the top of her bent), the queen said:
O king, recall the event that happened long ago in the war between gods and asuras where the enemy destroyed all your forces except your life.
O king, I rescued you there. Since I was alert to protect you, you granted me two boons.
O protector of the earth, O king, honest in keeping promises, I (now) seek those two boons which were reserved as deposits.
The boons you have vowed to give shall rightfully be given to me. If not, disgraced by you I shall give up my life right away.
The king now came under the control of Kaikeyi by his own words like a deer that jumps into the trap for its own destruction.
Thereafter, she said to the infatuated king who had promised to confer her boons, O lord of the earth, O king, right now I shall speak to you about the two boons granted by you. Listen to my words.
Preparations for Rama's consecration have been made. With these very materials for installation, my son Bharata should be consecrated.
Then in the war between gods and asuras, O lord, pleased with me you have promised a second boon and the time has come to grant it.
Consigned to the Dandaka forest for fourteen years, clad in bark and deer skin and wearing matted hair, Rama shall live like an ascetic.
Let Bharata be princeregent without any rivals. This is my great desire. I am asking for an already granted boon. Let me see Rama's departure to the forest today itself.
O king of kings, by being true to your vow, protect your race, character and lineage. Those sages whose ascetism is their wealth maintain that there is no merit superior to truthfulness which can confer man a place in the other world.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकादशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eleventh sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
After hearing the dreadful words of Kaikeyi, the maharaja (Dasaratha), engulfed in grief, was extremely distressed for a moment.
' Is this a dream? Or a hallucination of the mind? Or some foreboding evil I am going to experience or a malady of my mind'? (wondered Dasaratha)
The King absorbed in such thoughts did not get solace. He was startled  and distressed like a deer beholding a tigress. He had long lost the senses struck by the (ruthless) words of Kaikeyi. He sank down upon the bare floor heaving deep sighs like  a venomous serpent lying confined in a circle. 'What a pity' said the king with indignation and with his senses overwhelmed  by sorrow  fell into a stupor again.
Regaining his consciousness after a long time, the king in deep grief and with eyes as though burning in anger looked at  Kaikeyi  and said:
O woman of cruel and sinful nature, you are bent on destroying this family. What harm has been done to you  by Rama or by me?
Then Rama was conducting himself in relation to you as his own mother, for what purpose are you seeking injustice to such a person?
In my ignorance I brought home for my selfdestruction a king's daughter who was like a venomous female serpent.
When all living beings of this world are extoling the virtues of Rama, for what crime should I abandon my beloved son?
I shall give up Kausalya or Sumitra or all my wealth or even my own life but I cannot leave Rama who is devoted to his father.
When I see my firstborn , I experience supreme delight. But if I do not see him, my life loses its meaning.
This world can exist without the Sun or crops (can be grown) without water but without Rama, life would not exist in my body.
O lady of evil intentions, enough of this. Give up your resolve. Here I touch your feet with my head. Be pleased with me.
O sinful one why have you got this most dreadful thought? Do you want to know  my likes or dislikes about Bharata? Let them be so.But speaking of Rama earlier, you used to say, 'Rama is my eldest son. He is noble and foremost in discharging his  duties.' Such sweet words could not have been said only to please me.
Further you are tormented with sorrow under the influence of others' insinuations. You are causing me great pain by entering the empty chamber of wrath.
O queen, till now you had a moral sense. With your mind debased (now), a very great immorality has infected the  Ikshvaku race.
O largeeyed lady, you have never done anything improper or unpalatable towards me in the past. Therefore I do not  believe your words.
O childish one, you used to tell me several times that Rama is as dear to you as the highsouled Bharata.
O lady how do you wish this righteous and illustrious Rama to dwell in the forest for fourteen years?
Why do you want Rama who is so tender and a firm follower of dharma to dwell in the highly dreadful forest?
O woman with attractive eyes, why do you want Rama who is so charming and serving you to be exiled to a distant place?
Rama is doing greater service to you than Bharata. Therefore, I do not find any reason for you to have a special love for Bharata.
There are many thousands of women and attendants (in the inner apartment), but who will do greater service and honour you more than Rama, the best among men in the execution of your orders.
The best among men, Rama has won the trust of the inhabitants of the country by securing their affection with a pure heart and by doing acts dear to them. Therefore, neither a word of blame nor reproach applies to this scion of the Raghu dynasty (Rama).
Rama is a hero who wins over the people by his truthfulness, the poor by charity, the preceptors by his service and the enemies in the battle by the power of  his bow.
Truth, munificence, asceticism, renunciation, purity, uprightness, learning and service to his superiors all those (virtues) are firmly planted in this descendant of the Raghus.
How do you, O Devi, wish to harm Rama who is endowed with uprightness, who resembles the gods and in lustre to great ascetics?
How can I, for your sake, speak harsh to my beloved Rama who uses pleasing words to the people of the world, and never an unpleasant word which I can recall?
Where is the refuge for me without him in whom dwell forgiveness, forbearance, renunciation, truthfulness, righteousness, gratefulness and also nonviolence towards all living beings?
O Kaikeyi, you should show mercy to this wretched, old man on the verge of death, wailing pitifully.
I shall give you all that can be secured on this earth bounded by the ocean. Show no anger.
O Kaikeyi I bow to you with folded palms. I touch your feet, too. Be the saviour of Rama. Let no sin taint me here (in this life).
Then the fierce Kaikeyi used fiercer words in reply to the king who was tormented with grief and filled with tears, senses switched off, head reeling, overwhelmed with pain, beseeching again and again to ferry him across the ocean of sorrow as quickly as possible:
O valiant king, if you repent like this after having given two boons, how will you talk about your righteousness on this earth?
O knower of righteousness when innumerable rajarshis assemble and ask you on this what answer will you give?
Will you say, 'To such a Kaikeyi by whose mercy I am alive and by whom I was protected, I have broken the promise given'?
O king, right now having given two boons, you are speaking otherwise. You are bringing blemish to kings (of the Ikshwaku race)
(King) Saibya gave his own flesh to the hawk in the conflict between the hawk and the pigeon. (King) Alarka gave his eyes (to a blind man) and attained the highest state.
Having made the vow (to the gods), the ocean does not advance beyond the shore. Recollect the history of the earlier kings and do not make the vow false.
O wickedminded one, deserting righteousness and installing Rama in the kingdom, you want to enjoy life with Kausalya everafter?
Whether righteous or unrighteous, true or false, there is no deviation from what you have promised to me.
If Rama is coronated I will die while as you are watching right in your presence today itself by drinking excessive poison.
If I were to see Rama's mother receiving homage from everybody even for a day, I shall prefer my death.
O king, I swear on Bharata and on my own life that nothing less than Rama's banishment will satisfy me.
Kaikeyi, having spoken to this extent remained silent. She heeded not the lament of the king.
Having heard of the highly unfair demands by Kaikeyi for Rama's exile to the forest and Bharata's prosperity (enthronement), the king was dumbstruck for a while with his senses agitated. He did not speak to Kaikeyi.
The unhappy king intently fixed his gaze at his beloved queen speaking unpleasant words charged with grief and anguish, unpleasant to the heart like the dreadful thunderbolt.
Reflecting on the determination of the queen and her dreadful vow, the king sighed and cried, 'O Rama' and then fell down like a tree severed.
The lord of the earth (Dasaratha) became like a man with the mind deranged, like a sick man behaving to the contrary, like a serpent with its energy drained (through mantra).
The king addressed Kaikeyi in humble words saying, Why did you exhibit this unfortunate act apparently beneficial to you? You are not ashamed of saying this like one whose faculties are possessed by an evil spirit.
I never knew earlier when you were young that you possessed such perverse behaviour. But now I perceive the reverse (of what I knew).
You are asking for a boon that Bharata should be enthroned in the kingdom while Rama should live in the forest. From where did you get this apprehension?
If you wish to do good to your husband, to the world and also to Bharata, refrain from this illusory thought.
O cruel one, O woman of sinful resolve, O vile (creature), O woman of evil deeds, what  wrong or sin do you really see in Rama or in me.
Depriving Rama, Bharata in no way will occupy the kingdom because in the matter of righteousness I think he is superior even to Rama.
While instructing Rama to go to the forest, how can I look at his face, pale like the eclipsed moon?
I have taken this decision in consultation with friends to install Rama. How can I see such a decision being reversed like a retreating army defeated by enemies? Kings from different quarters have already arrived and they will say, How did this ignorant descendant of the Ikshakus (Dasaratha) rule this kingdom for such a long time?
When several virtuous and learned elders ask me about Rama, what shall I tell them?
If I tell the truth 'Tortured by Kaikeyi, I have sent Rama to the forest', none will believe it  and they will consider it untruth.
If Rama takes refuge in the forest, what will Kausalya say to me? Having committed such an unpleasant act, what reply can I give her?
Sweetspoken Kausalya who always cherishes my welfare. who has given me my beloved son, who has served me like an attendant, a friend, a wife, a sister and a mother deserved courteous treatment from me, but  because of you, she never received due attention from me.
I have done many favours to you. Like a sick person afflicted by eating rice mixed with unwholesome curry, those acts of kindness are burning me now.
In seeing the insult meted out to Rama and his journey to the forest, how will frightened  Sumitra  have confidence in me?
Alas Sita will listen in a pitiable state the two unpleasant events namely my death and  Rama's exile to the foest.
What a pity Vaidehi, lamenting like a Kinnari forsaken by a Kinnara on the Himalayan slopes, will cause death to me.
With Rama living in the wilderness and Sita crying, I do not hope to survive for long, indeed.
O Devi you will certainly rule the kingdom as a widow along with your son. (But) I do not wish to live after Rama is exiled.
Like people regarding wine mixed with poison as fine before drinking it, I had a firm belief that you were a chaste woman, but while you who look extremely beautiful you are actually not so.
You used to console me with so many words pleasing but untrue and you killed me like a hunter getting the deer trapped and slaughtered through the melody of music.
Respectable people on the highway will certainly say 'He sold away his son' and censure me as a mean person like a brahmin consuming liquor.
What suffering What a calamity that I am made to put up with your words. I am subject to this suffering may be as expiation for the sin formerly committed.
O wretch I protected you in my folly for a long time through ignorance, like a rope preserved which turned out to be a noose to hang me with.
While sporting with you, I did not realize you were death incarnate. Like a child handling a black cobra I caressed you.
Wicked I am, I have made that magnanimous Rama fatherless. This world of living beings is certainly entitled to condemn me.
(They will say), 'Alas how utterly foolish and lustful is king Dasaratha who is sending his beloved son to the forest for the sake of a woman'.
'(Rama) already emaciated by observing vows related to ritual and celibacy in compliance with the orders of the preceptors has to undergo hardships again at a time when he should enjoy pleasures (of life)'.
My son Rama will not say a second word to me, if I tell him 'Go to the forest'.He will say, 'Certainly so'.
If this scion of the Raghu race (Rama) urged to go to the forest acts against my order, it will be welcome but my son will not do it.
The descendant of the Raghus (Rama) who is pure in thought will not come to know my intention. Therefore if I tell him 'Go to the forest,' he will say, 'Certainly so'.
If Rama goes to the forest, the god of death will conduct me to his abode, for condemned by the entire world, I shall not be forgiven (even by Yama).
With me dead and Rama, the best among men, banished, what harmful acts are you contemplating against my wellwishers?
If queen Kausalya loses me, Rama, Lakshmana and Satrughna will follow me into death, unable to bear the grief.
O Kaikeyi consign Kausalya, Sumitra, me and my three sons into hell and be happy.
You will rule undisturbed the Ikshvaku race honoured for its divine virtues. Now abandoned by me and Rama it will be afflicted with grief.
If Rama's exile is approved by Bharata, then let him not perform my funeral rites after my death.
O my enemy, O wicked Kaikeyi, after Rama, the foremost of men, has left for the forest your desires will be fulfilled. And after my death, you as a widow along with your son will rule the kingdom.
You lived in my palace under the name of a princess. You have brought me, for sure, unparalleled dishonour and disgrace. Everybody will look upon me with contempt as if I have committed a sinful act.
How will my son, Rama, who used to ride on chariots, elephants and horses roam the wilderness barefoot?
How will my son for whom the cooks with kundalas in their ears used to proudly prepare enough food and beverages subsist on astringent, pungent, bitter wild fruits and roots?
How will he who was habituated to wearing expensive apparels and to (royal) comforts over a long period of time live (sleep) on the ground, putting on saffron robes?
Whose are these dreadful words, this inconceivable plan of Rama's exilement and Bharata's enthronement?
A woman means one who secretly harms others. This is shameful indeed. They always seek selfish interests. I do not say this of all women, only of Bharata's mother.
O malicious one, O covetous one, O cruel one, O woman determined to torment me, what fault have you seen in Rama who is always devoted to the welfare of others?
This entire world will be inflamed to see Rama plunged in adversity. Fathers will abandon their sons. Wives, attached to their husbands, will forsake them.
When I see my son, handsome and welladorned like the son of a celestial deity, coming towards me, I rejoice. Even his very sight makes me grow young again.
Nature's activity will continue even without the Sun or even if  Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt, sends no rain but none will live to see Rama departing to the forest. This is my conviction.
Alas I carried all along on my lap a highly poisonous female snake I gave you shelter while you were like death .This delusion is the cause of my ruin.You were my enemy. You wished me harm. You wished my destruction.
With Rama and Lakshmana withdrawn from me, my kinsmen killed, let Bharata along with you rule the city and the kingdom causing delight to my enemies.
O cruelhearted woman, you strike one in adversity. Why are your teeth with which you are now speaking (such harsh words) do not fall to the ground, broken into a thousand fragments?
How do you find fault with Rama who does not utter even one harmful or unpalatable word, who does not know how to use harsh words, and who speaks pleasingly and who is always honoured for his virtues?
O obloquy on the house of Kekaya, you may grieve or burn yourself in the fire, or get  destroyed. Even if you fall down on earth broken into a thousand pieces I will not act on your terrible, harmful words.
There is no life for me without my son (Rama). What to speak of happiness again? Where is pleasure for a selfrespecting man like me? O queen, it does not behove you to do this harmful act. I will touch your feet. Show pity on me.
The king, with his heart in the grip of a woman, wailing like an orphan tried to reach her feet, exceeding the limit of selfrespect but, unable to touch them as she pulled them apart, he collapsed like a sick man.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्वादशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twelfth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The maharaja lying on the floor resembled (king) Yayati fallen from heaven after his merits (earned earlier) were exhausted. He neither deserved nor was accustomed to such (humiliating) treatment. Fearless Kaikeyi ,the incarnate of misfortune having accomplished her purpose, displyaing feigned fear, urged the king again (without inhibition), about the boons:
O great king you used to boast that you always speak the truth and are steadfast in your vows. Why are you now seeking to avoid granting me this boon?
Thus addressed by Kaikeyi, king Dasaratha flew into a temper for a while, and then as if in a state of delirium, replied:
Alas O ignoble woman, my enemy, your desire would be fulfilled after Rama, the foremost among men is exiled and I am dead. You will be happy thereafter
Even in heaven when the gods enquire about the welfare of Rama how will I convince them about his banishment repudiating the fact? What a catastrophe
If I tell the truth, 'To please Kaikeyi I have sent Rama to the forest', none will believe it  and will consider it untruth.
When I was issueless, I obtained mighty and valiant Rama with great effort as a son. How can I banish him?
How can I exile Rama, whose eyes resemble lotus petals, who is learned, who has subdued his anger and who is always full of forgiveness?
Rama with a charming personality has a complexion like the blue lotus. He has long arms (with immense strength). How can I banish him to Dandaka forest?
Rama deserves happiness not suffering. How can I  bear to see such a sagacious Rama undergoing distress?
If death comes to me right now I shall be very happy because I will not have to inflict suffering on Rama who does not deserve it.
O cruel, malevolent Kaikeyi, why do you propose such a harmful act against Rama who has truth as his prowess and who is so dear to me? Certainly, you will get unparalleled infamy and disgrace in this world.
While Dasaratha was thus lamenting with a distracted mind, the Sun set and night fell.
For the king who was in deep anguish and in tears the night appeared dark even though it was adorned with the lunar orb.
The old king Dasaratha, heaving hot sighs, started lamenting pitiably fixing his gaze at the sky like the sick:
'O auspiciouslooking Night adorned with stars, I do not wish to see the dawn. O gentle night, be kind to me I pray with folded hands'.
'Or, pass off quickly. I do not want to see this merciless, malicious Kaikeyi who is the cause of this great misfortune'.
Having said this, the king spoke again with folded hands to Kaikeyi in order to appease her:
O lady with fair hips, I hope whatever I have said has not been a cry in the (empty) sky. O young lady show me this favour. Surely you are kindhearted.
O queen with beautiful, dark eyelashes, show pity on me. Let Rama receive this unbounded kingdom through you and you acquire fame.
O lady with heavy hips, charming eyes and a beautiful face, do this favour to me, to Rama, to the world, to all the preceptors and to Bharata too.
The king with a clean heart, whose eyes had been rendered red with weeping wailed  piteously. Even after hearing it, that malicious woman full of wicked thoughts did not act upon his word.
Seeing his dear wife not pleased (despite his pleadings) and urging him, to the contrary, for the banishment of his son, the king overcome with grief fell down unconscious on the floor.
The night passed off with the highminded king lamenting this way and heaving deep sighs. When he got up, the eminent king stopped (the panegyrists) awakening him.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रयोदशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirteenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The evil woman (Kaikeyi) said to the king of the Ikshvaku race who lay unconscious on the floor writhing and tormented with grief on account of his son.
(Kaikeyi said) What is this? After hearing my response to the promised boon, why are you lying down on the floor dejected as if you had committed a sin? It behoves you to maintain your status.
Those conversant with righteousness say that truth is a great virtue. By following the truth, I have enlightened you about your duty.
O King O lord of the earth (king) Saibya attained the highest state by offering his own body to a hawk in accordance with his promise.
In the same way the lustrous king Alarka, on being solicited by a brahmin who was an adept in the Vedas, plucked his own eyes and gave them to him without hesitation.
The ocean, lord of rivers, even when (tidal) time comes does not cross the shore in obedience to truth.
Truth is Brahman in one word. Righteousness is firmly established in truth. Truth is the imperishable Vedas. The supreme state can be attained by means of truth.
O excellent one, if your mind is firmly fixed in righteousness, then by following it fulfil the boon granted to me.You are the bestower of boons indeed
You must uphold righteousness. I also urge you to do that. Send your son Rama to the forest. I am repeating this statememt thrice.
O noble one, if you do not fulfil the agreement, it will mean I have been abandoned by you. (Therefore) I will give up my life in your presence.
In this way urged by Kaikeyi without fear or hesitation, he (Dasaratha), like Bali unable to release himself from the noose cast by Indra (through Vamana), could not get out of the noose of promise.
Like a bullock, restlessly moving between the wheels and the yoke, Dasaratha's heart started beating wildly and his face turned pale.
The king was unable to see with his eyes overwhelmed (with tears). Gaining with great difficulty a firm footing and courage he addressed Kaikeyi:
O wicked woman, I held your hand amid chantings of mantras with the sacred fire (as witness). I now disown that hand, you and your son begotten by me.
O queen the night has departed and the Sun is about to rise. The preceptors now will definitely ask me to hasten for the consecration.
With the materials already collected for the consecration of Rama he will perform my funeral rite of offering water to the dead.
O woman of inauspicious practices, since you are obstructing Rama's coronation, you and your son shall not perform my funeral rite of offering water to the dead.
Having seen people formerly enjoying happiness, I cannot see them again with their downcast, cheerless faces devoid of all happiness.
While the king was thus speaking to her (Kaikeyi) that holy night resplendent with the Moon and the stars, the day dawned.
Thereafter, Kaikeyi of sinful conduct and skilful in the use of words, rendered senseless by wrath, again addressing the king in harsh words said:
O king, why are you speaking these painful, poisonous words? What is this? It behoves you to summon your son Rama who does not expearience this pain.
Only after you have  installed my son in the kingdom and sent Rama to the forest and  made me free from rivals, you shall have your duty fulfiled.
The king who was very much incited by her words, like a horse of the best breed whipped by the lash, replied to Kaikeyi:
I am bound by bond of righteousness. My intellect is destroyed. I wish to see my beloved, virtuous firstborn, Rama.
The night dawned. Ths Sun rose. The auspicious time with the sacred star in (favourable) conjunction arrived. The virtuous Vasistha, surrounded by his disciples, soon entered the best of abodes with the articles collected (for the ceremony).
The streets in Ayodhya were swept and sprinkled with water, decorated with excellent flags, strewn with flowers of variegated colours and bedecked with various flower garlands. The streets were crowded with curious people rejoicing at the event. The stalls and markets were abundantly filled with merchandise.The city was full of great festivities. The people were curious to see Rama. Sandalwood and incense were burnt and fragrance pervaded in all the directions. The city resembled Amaravati, the abode of Indra.Vasistha entered the city, covered some distance and beheld the best inner apartment. There he saw host of brahmins, citizens and villagers. The best of inner apartments was graced with brahmins who were experts in sacrificial rituals priests and eminent  brahmins.
Having reached the inner apartment, the eminent ascetic, Vasistha felt very happy. He passed by the people and entered the inner apartment.
Sage Vasistha saw handsome Sumantra, minister to Dasaratha, a lion among the charioteers coming out of the gate.
Effulgent Vasistha said to the expert chariotieer Sumantra to inform the king immediately of his arrival.
Here are the pots filled with water from river Ganga and golden vessels with water from the seas. And throne made of udumbara wood for the installation ceremony. All kinds of seeds, perfumes, different kinds of precious stones, honey, curd, ghee, puffed grains, kusha grass (special grass used in rituals), flowers, milk, eight beautiful girls, an intoxicated elephant, a dignified chariot drawn by four horses, a sword, an elegant bow, a palanquin accompanied by bearers, an umbrella resembling the full Moon, two white fans made of Yak's tails, a golden vessel, a palecoloured humped bull, wearing golden gerland, a lion having four strong and large teeth, a mighty horse of the best breed, a throne, tiger skin, fire kindled with faggots, all kinds of musical instruments, courtesans, welldecorated women, preceptors, brahmins, cows, sacred animals and birds, eminent citizens and villagers, groups of merchants all speaking pleasant words and kings -- all are here for Rama's coronation.
Here are the pots filled with water from river Ganga and golden vessels with water from the seas. And throne made of udumbara wood for the installation ceremony. All kinds of seeds, perfumes, different kinds of precious stones, honey, curd, ghee, puffed grains, kusha grass (special grass used in rituals), flowers, milk, eight beautiful girls, an intoxicated elephant, a dignified chariot drawn by four horses, a sword, an elegant bow, a palanquin accompanied by bearers, an umbrella resembling the full Moon, two white fans made of Yak's tails, a golden vessel, a palecoloured humped bull, wearing golden gerland, a lion having four strong and large teeth, a mighty horse of the best breed, a throne, tiger skin, fire kindled with faggots, all kinds of musical instruments, courtesans, welldecorated women, preceptors, brahmins, cows, sacred animals and birds, eminent citizens and villagers, groups of merchants all speaking pleasant words and kings -- all are here for Rama's coronation.
Here are the pots filled with water from river Ganga and golden vessels with water from the seas. And throne made of udumbara wood for the installation ceremony. All kinds of seeds, perfumes, different kinds of precious stones, honey, curd, ghee, puffed grains, kusha grass (special grass used in rituals), flowers, milk, eight beautiful girls, an intoxicated elephant, a dignified chariot drawn by four horses, a sword, an elegant bow, a palanquin accompanied by bearers, an umbrella resembling the full Moon, two white fans made of Yak's tails, a golden vessel, a palecoloured humped bull, wearing golden gerland, a lion having four strong and large teeth, a mighty horse of the best breed, a throne, tiger skin, fire kindled with faggots, all kinds of musical instruments, courtesans, welldecorated women, preceptors, brahmins, cows, sacred animals and birds, eminent citizens and villagers, groups of merchants all speaking pleasant words and kings -- all are here for Rama's coronation.
Here are the pots filled with water from river Ganga and golden vessels with water from the seas. And throne made of udumbara wood for the installation ceremony. All kinds of seeds, perfumes, different kinds of precious stones, honey, curd, ghee, puffed grains, kusha grass (special grass used in rituals), flowers, milk, eight beautiful girls, an intoxicated elephant, a dignified chariot drawn by four horses, a sword, an elegant bow, a palanquin accompanied by bearers, an umbrella resembling the full Moon, two white fans made of Yak's tails, a golden vessel, a palecoloured humped bull, wearing golden gerland, a lion having four strong and large teeth, a mighty horse of the best breed, a throne, tiger skin, fire kindled with faggots, all kinds of musical instruments, courtesans, welldecorated women, preceptors, brahmins, cows, sacred animals and birds, eminent citizens and villagers, groups of merchants all speaking pleasant words and kings -- all are here for Rama's coronation.
Hasten the maharaja as Rama has to be installed in the kingdom as soon as the day breaks under the conjunction of the sacred Pushya star.
Having heard the words of the great Vasistha, charioteer Sumantra entered the  inner apartment, singing the praise of this tiger among kings (Dasaratha).
The doorkeepers, beloved wellwishers of the king, did not detain aged Sumantra  who was liked by the king and who had arrived early.
Sumantra approached the king unaware of the state of his mind and commenced praising him in highly pleasing words (as usual).
Thereafter the charioteer Sumantra entered the inner apartment of the king, and with folded hands began singing the praise of the lord of the earth appropriate to the hour.
Just as the mighty ocean rejoices at sunrise, the inherently cheerful Sumantra became delighted to see the king.
Just as Indra's charioteer at this time (at dawn) extols him, the conquerer of demons, so do I rouse you (with a song).
Just as the Vedas and Vedangas awaken the selfborn lord Brahma, so do I  awaken you.
As the Sun along with the Moon awakens the auspicious earth which supports all  beings, in the same way I am awakening you today.
O mighty king get up at once like the Sun rising up mount Meru. Put on your beautiful body auspicious robes befitting the festivity.
O descendent of Kakutstha, may Moon and Sun, Siva and Kubera, Varuna, Agni and Indra bestow victory on you.
O best among kings the holy night has passed. Having been acquainted with the acts accomplished so far, perform whatever is further necessary for the installation    ceremony. All preparations for Rama's coronation ceremony have since been complete.
Venerable Vasistha along with inhabitants of the city and countryside including merchants and brahmins with folded hands awaits you.
O king Rama's installation may be promptly ordered. As herds without herdsman, army without commander, night without the Moon, and cows without a bull, so is a kingdom without a king.
Hearing these  meaningful words of Sumantra uttered in an appealing tone, the lord of the earth relapsed into grief.
The virtuous and glorious king thinking of his son without cheer looked upward with eyes red with tears and said to the charioteer, You are causing my heart excruciating pain with your words.
Having heard the sorrowful words of the king and having seen his wretched state  Sumantra with palms folded moved away a little from the place.
When the king himself in that wretched state was not able to speak to Sumantra, crafty Kaikeyi said to him in reply:
O Sumantra, excited with joy on account of the (proposed) installation of Rama, the king did not have a wink of sleep all night. He is weary and overpowered with sleep.
So, O Sumantra quickly fetch the gentle, illustrious prince Rama. Let there be no hesitation in this matter.
Thinking that an auspicious event will take place, he rejoiced at heart and in obedience to royal order, left at once.
Urged by Kaikeyi, Sumantra thought 'Righteous Rama will definitely come here for the purpose of  installation'.
So thought the charioteer and filled with great delight left (the inner apartment), eager to see the mightyarmed Rama.
Sumantra, departed from the auspcious inner apartment which looked like the deep waters of the sea and saw people thronging the gate.
Then Sumantra hastened towards the gate where he saw kings, wealthy people and citizens who had already arrived and waiting there.   इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुर्दशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fourteenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The brahmins wellversed in the Vedas stayed waiting all night and assembled at the pavilion (for the consecration ceremony) along with royal priests.
For the consecration of the scion of the Raghu race (Rama), ministers, army chiefs and chiefs of merchants' associations assembled, brimming with joy.
The best of brahmins had decided to perform the consecration ceremony after the  bright Sun appeared in the sky when the Pushya star approached the karkataka lagna, which was the constellation at the time of Rama's birth.
Water had been fetched from the sacred confluence of Ganga and Yamuna, from other  holy streams, wells, ponds and lakes, from rivers flowing eastward, westward, and  zigzag, from rivers from all directions joined together. And from all the seas.
Gold and silver vessels filled with holy water and puffed corn, adorned with lotuses, water lilies and leaves from trees rich in sap shone.
Honey, curd, ghee, puffed grain, darbha grass, flowers and milk were arranged. Wellmannered courtesans adorned with all kinds of ornaments (stood in position).
An excellent fan of yak's tail with a staff of gold  studded with gems looking like diffused moonbeams was kept ready.
A lustrous pale white umbrella resembling the Moon's orb or the pole star was kept in front of the coronation pavilion.
A bull and a horse both pale white and a majestic elephant in rut worthy of royal ride stood waiting.
Eight auspicious maidens adorned with all types of ornaments, all sorts of musical instruments, panegyrists and others (were in waiting).
Just as articles necessary for the consecration of the descendants of the Ikshvakus, are customarily arranged in the kingdom, in the same way things were arranged for the coronation of the prince belonging to that race. All those who had assembled there in response to the order of the king could not see him and so they said to themselves 'Who will inform the king of our arrival. Everything is kept ready for consecration of the sagacious Rama as prince regent. The Sun has risen. But we do not find the king'.
While the sovereign monarchs who hailed from different parts of the earth were thus talking Sumantra the king's confidant said:
In obedience to the king's command I am hurrying for Rama. All of you are honourable to king Dasaratha, especially to Rama.
On your behalf I shall enquire from the king who is awake now about his welfare and the reason for calling me here.
Having said so, Sumantra who was versed in history and tradition  approached the inner apartment which always remains closed.
Entering the king's inner apartment, he began extoling the virtues of the royal dynasty, and stood there as he approached the king's bedchamber.
Having approached the king's bedchamber Sumatra stood behind the screen, singing his glory and seeking the blessings (of God) on this son of Raghus dynasty.
O scion of the kakutsthas (Dasaratha), may Moon and Sun, Siva and Kubera, Varuna, Agni and Indra grant you victory
The holy night has passed and the auspicious day has arrived. O tiger among kings,  awaken and attend to your duties.
O scion of the Raghu dynasty brahmins, army commanders and merchants have arrived and they beseech your audience. Please awake.
Dasaratha waking up saw the charioteer and expert counsellor Sumantra extoling him, and said:
You had been asked by her (Kaikeyi) to bring Rama here. What is the reason the command is disregarded?
I did not sleep (last night). Bring Rama here at once, said king Dasaratha to the charioteer again.
At these words of the king, he offered his salutations by bowing his head and left the king's apartment, reflecting on the great happy event.
The charioteer left cheerfully, happily looking at the highway bedecked with pennants and banners.
The charioteer heard the conversation relating to Rama and his consecration among the happy citizens.
Thereafter, Sumantra beheld the beautiful palace of Rama,  resembling  the abode of Indra or the peak of Kailasa in its splendour.
The charioteer (Sumantra) beheld Rama's palace closed with two heavypanelled doors. Adorned with hundreds of galleries, it had a peak mounted with golden idols. The arches were studded with different gems and corals. Bright like dense autumnal cloud, it shone like the cave of mount Meru. It was ornamented with excellent garlands and precious diamonds. Pearls were strewn around. Decorated with sandal and aloe wood, it emitted, like the peak of mount Dardura, captivating fragrance৷৷ Sarasas and peacocks were singing sweetly. The palace was full of skilfully carved images of deer and other embellishments. It attracted the minds and the eyes of all living beings with brilliant splendour. Resplendent like the Sun and the Moon, it looked like the abode of Kubera and a reflected image of the abode of Mahendra. It was crowded with birds of various kinds. In height it was equal to the peak of mount Meru. Villagers thronged the palace with gifts, eagerly waiting with folded hands to see the spectacle of Rama's coronation. Lofty, it looked like a vast cloud. Welldecked and filled with various gems, it was crowded with hunchbacks and kiratas (hunters) too.
The charioteer (Sumantra) beheld Rama's palace closed with two heavypanelled doors. Adorned with hundreds of galleries, it had a peak mounted with golden idols. The arches were studded with different gems and corals. Bright like dense autumnal cloud, it shone like the cave of mount Meru. It was ornamented with excellent garlands and precious diamonds. Pearls were strewn around. Decorated with sandal and aloe wood, it emitted, like the peak of mount Dardura, captivating fragrance৷৷ Sarasas and peacocks were singing sweetly. The palace was full of skilfully carved images of deer and other embellishments. It attracted the minds and the eyes of all living beings with brilliant splendour. Resplendent like the Sun and the Moon, it looked like the abode of Kubera and a reflected image of the abode of Mahendra. It was crowded with birds of various kinds. In height it was equal to the peak of mount Meru. Villagers thronged the palace with gifts, eagerly waiting with folded hands to see the spectacle of Rama's coronation. Lofty, it looked like a vast cloud. Welldecked and filled with various gems, it was crowded with hunchbacks and kiratas (hunters) too.
The charioteer (Sumantra) beheld Rama's palace closed with two heavypanelled doors. Adorned with hundreds of galleries, it had a peak mounted with golden idols. The arches were studded with different gems and corals. Bright like dense autumnal cloud, it shone like the cave of mount Meru. It was ornamented with excellent garlands and precious diamonds. Pearls were strewn around. Decorated with sandal and aloe wood, it emitted, like the peak of mount Dardura, captivating fragrance৷৷ Sarasas and peacocks were singing sweetly. The palace was full of skilfully carved images of deer and other embellishments. It attracted the minds and the eyes of all living beings with brilliant splendour. Resplendent like the Sun and the Moon, it looked like the abode of Kubera and a reflected image of the abode of Mahendra. It was crowded with birds of various kinds. In height it was equal to the peak of mount Meru. Villagers thronged the palace with gifts, eagerly waiting with folded hands to see the spectacle of Rama's coronation. Lofty, it looked like a vast cloud. Welldecked and filled with various gems, it was crowded with hunchbacks and kiratas (hunters) too.
The charioteer (Sumantra) beheld Rama's palace closed with two heavypanelled doors. Adorned with hundreds of galleries, it had a peak mounted with golden idols. The arches were studded with different gems and corals. Bright like dense autumnal cloud, it shone like the cave of mount Meru. It was ornamented with excellent garlands and precious diamonds. Pearls were strewn around. Decorated with sandal and aloe wood, it emitted, like the peak of mount Dardura, captivating fragrance৷৷ Sarasas and peacocks were singing sweetly. The palace was full of skilfully carved images of deer and other embellishments. It attracted the minds and the eyes of all living beings with brilliant splendour. Resplendent like the Sun and the Moon, it looked like the abode of Kubera and a reflected image of the abode of Mahendra. It was crowded with birds of various kinds. In height it was equal to the peak of mount Meru. Villagers thronged the palace with gifts, eagerly waiting with folded hands to see the spectacle of Rama's coronation. Lofty, it looked like a vast cloud. Welldecked and filled with various gems, it was crowded with hunchbacks and kiratas (hunters) too.
The charioteer (Sumantra) beheld Rama's palace closed with two heavypanelled doors. Adorned with hundreds of galleries, it had a peak mounted with golden idols. The arches were studded with different gems and corals. Bright like dense autumnal cloud, it shone like the cave of mount Meru. It was ornamented with excellent garlands and precious diamonds. Pearls were strewn around. Decorated with sandal and aloe wood, it emitted, like the peak of mount Dardura, captivating fragrance৷৷ Sarasas and peacocks were singing sweetly. The palace was full of skilfully carved images of deer and other embellishments. It attracted the minds and the eyes of all living beings with brilliant splendour. Resplendent like the Sun and the Moon, it looked like the abode of Kubera and a reflected image of the abode of Mahendra. It was crowded with birds of various kinds. In height it was equal to the peak of mount Meru. Villagers thronged the palace with gifts, eagerly waiting with folded hands to see the spectacle of Rama's coronation. Lofty, it looked like a vast cloud. Welldecked and filled with various gems, it was crowded with hunchbacks and kiratas (hunters) too.
The charioteer (Sumantra) beheld Rama's palace closed with two heavypanelled doors. Adorned with hundreds of galleries, it had a peak mounted with golden idols. The arches were studded with different gems and corals. Bright like dense autumnal cloud, it shone like the cave of mount Meru. It was ornamented with excellent garlands and precious diamonds. Pearls were strewn around. Decorated with sandal and aloe wood, it emitted, like the peak of mount Dardura, captivating fragrance৷৷ Sarasas and peacocks were singing sweetly. The palace was full of skilfully carved images of deer and other embellishments. It attracted the minds and the eyes of all living beings with brilliant splendour. Resplendent like the Sun and the Moon, it looked like the abode of Kubera and a reflected image of the abode of Mahendra. It was crowded with birds of various kinds. In height it was equal to the peak of mount Meru. Villagers thronged the palace with gifts, eagerly waiting with folded hands to see the spectacle of Rama's coronation. Lofty, it looked like a vast cloud. Welldecked and filled with various gems, it was crowded with hunchbacks and kiratas (hunters) too.
Mounted on a chariot, attached with a fender and driven by horses, the charioteer advanced towards the royal palace of Rama delighting the minds of the people of the city.
Having reached the palace abounding in deer and peacocks which resembled the magnificent and opulent abode of Indra, the charioteer was thrilled at the allpervading beauty of the place befitting Rama.
Having entered the welldecorated palace which was (lofty) like Kailasa, he crossed the courtyards comparable to the abode of the celestials, passed through the many bosom friends of Rama and entered the private apartment.
There he heard the happy words spoken by people about the enthronement of prince Rama and his future wellbeing.
Sumantra beheld Rama's palace which resembled the high summit of mount Meru shining with splendour. Filled with animals and birds, if looked like the abode of Indra.
He saw villagers and others in crores and parardhas, leaving their chariots and thronging the gateway, (some) paying obeisance with folded palms and (some) carrying gifts in their hands.
He beheld a beautiful elephant named Satrunjaya with a huge body on which Rama was to mount. It looked like a vast mountain or a huge cloud. With ichor flowing from his temples and without caring for the goad, the elephant was intolerant.
Important ministers who were dear to the king and welladorned arrived there on their  horses, chariots and elephants. Sumantra finding his way through the crowd of the people who assembled on all sides, entered the glorious private apartment of Rama.
The palace looked like a mountain peak covered by a cloud and a great vimana surrounded by splendid apartments. The charioteer entered the palace unobstructed like a crocodile entering the ocean bristling with many gems.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चदशःसर्गः।।Thus ends the fifteenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the  holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Sumantra, who was conversant with ancient traditions, passed through the entrance of the inner apartment full of people and reached the sparsely crowded courtyard. There alert, loyal young men were attentively guarding the frontyard, armed with spears and bows and wearing shining earrings.
He saw aged people appointed as security staff for women's apartments. They were welladorned, dressed in orange robes and with rapt attention stood holding staff in their hands.
On seeing (Sumantra) arriving, all of them, wellwishers to Rama, quickly rose from their seats.
.Humble and extremely courteous charioteer (to the guards) said, Inform Rama at once that Sumantra is waiting at the entrance.
Always dedicated to the wellbeing of their master, they approached Rama who was in the company of Sita. And informed him:
Coming to know that Sumantra who is intimate to his father had arrived, Rama, in order to please him, commanded that he be escorted to that very place.
Sumantra beheld Rama, who resembled Kubera. Rama was sitting on a richlycovered golden couch, welladorned and anointed with precious, pure, fragrant red sandalpaste the colour of which appeared like the blood of a hog. With Sita standing by his side with a fan of yak's tail in her hand Rama, the tormentor of foes, looked like the Moon united with (the star) Chitra.
Sumantra who knew the art of modesty, made humble, reverential salutation to Rama  the granter of boons, shining like the Sun with his own effulgence.
On seeing Rama of charming countenance relaxing on a couch, Sumantra, honourable to the king (Dasaratha) said these words with folded palms.
O Rama, worthy son of Kausalya, your father along with queen Kaikeyi desires to see you.You may go there. Please do not delay.
Highly lustrous Rama ,the lion among men, when thus spoken to, was immensely pleased and extending due honour to him said to Sita:
O Sita, I am sure the king and queen are discussing something relating to my consecration.
My mother, daughter of the king of Kekaya, knows the king's intention and, heppy to do me good, seeks my wellbeing.
It is our fortune that the king and his dear queen have sent Sumantra as messenger who is interested in my prosperity and pleasure.
There worthy of the council of the king and the queen, a befitting messenger has come. Assuredly the king will consecrate me as heirapparent this very day.
I shall go from here immediately and see the king. Remain here happily and rejoice with your maids.
Reflecting over the auspicious event, the darkeyed Sita who is highly esteemed by her husband, followed him up to the entrance, (saying):
The king will bestow upon you, like the creator of the world (Brahma) bestowing on Indra, the kingdom served by brahmins who are fit to perform 'Rajasuya' sacrifice at the time of consecration.
I shall be delighted to see you initiated and engaged in the observance of the vow made pure, wearing excellent deerskin and carrying the horns of an antelope in your hand.
May Indra protect you on the east, Yama in the south, Varuna in the west and Kubera in the north.
Adorned in auspicious ornaments, Rama took leave of Sita and departed from his palace accompanied by Sumantra.
Like a lion living in a mountain cave and coming out of it, Rama while exiting, saw Lakshmana at the entrance bowing with folded hands.
Rama, the best among men, met all his friends in the middle courtyard. Having seen them all eager to see him, he approached and greeted them. Thereafter, he mounted the best silver chariot covered with tigerskin and glowing like fire.
The sound emanating from the chariot resembled the thunder. The spacious chariot was decorated with gold and gems which dazzled the eyes as though they shed the lustre of the Sun. The swiftmoving chariot was harnessed by excellent horses as if they were young elephants. Like the thousandeyed Indra, Rama, ablaze with royal splendour, mounted this chariot and sped away.
The magnificent chariot, rumbling like a stormcloud in the sky, emerged from (Rama's) residence like the Moon peeping through a huge cloud.
Holding an umbrella and a fan made of yak's tail in his hand Lakshmana boarded the chariot at the rear, guarding his brother.
As it (the chariot) was passing out, a tumultuoas roar emanated from the multitude of people all around.
Then the chief commanders riding the best of the horses and elephants, resembling hills in size, followed Rama in their hundreds and thousands.
Soldiers, anointing their bodies with pastes of sandal and aloe wood, equipped with armour and holding swords and bows, went ahead heralding his (Rama's) arrival.
At that time, sounds of musical instruments and songs of eulogy by panegyrists, roarings of warriors were heard on the way.
Rama, the subduer of enemies, proceeded while the wellattired women standing at the windows of their mansions showered heaps of flowers on him from every side.
Women with faultless limbs standing on their housetops as well as on the ground paid their homage with charming words in order to propitiate Rama.
O Joy of your mother (Rama) on seeing you having successfully acomplished the purpose of your journey (life) by securing your father's kingdom, your mother Kausalya will surely be delighted.
Those women considered Sita who was dear to the heart of Rama the best among all women.
Sita was united with Rama like Rohini with the Moon surely because of her great austerities performed in the past. (They observed).
Rama, the best among men, while riding along the highway overheard the pleasing words uttered by women standing on the elevation of their buildings. Thus hearing his own praise Rama proceeded along the highway.
Rama heard these various words of admiration by people who had assembled there, and (witnessed) the rejoicings of the citizens.
This scion of the Raghus (Rama) is going to acquire the earth and the wealth today by the king's grace. He will be our protector and fulfil all our desires.
If this Rama obtains the entire kingdom for a long time, it will be in the interest of the people. If he becomes king none will ever witness anything unpleasant or sad. (They observed).
With bards, panegyrists and great musical performers invoking blessings and walking ahead, he (Rama) proceeded, like Kubera amid intoxicated elephants  and horses.
Surrounded by friends overwhelmed with great joy, that glorious Rama aboard the chariot beheld the city decorated with banners and pennants and made fragrant with expensive incense and agaru and crowded with multitudes of people.
That Rama, proceeded down the middle of the highway made fragrant with agaru and incense, lined with houses gleaming pale white like clouds.
The highway (Rama entered) was splendid and spacious with heaps of sandal and agaru of the highest quality, excellent fragrant substances and bundles of white silken cloth. It gleamed with unholed (pristine) pearls, articles made of crystals, flowers of every kind and articles of food of every variety.
Rama beheld the highway resembling the pathway of gods in heaven. Here the crossroads were always worshipped with curd, grains of rice, sacrificial libations, laja or puffed rice, fragrant substances like sandal wood, agaru and garlands of every kind.
Hearing many words of blessings uttered by his friends and honouring each person   according to his rank, he passed on.
(They said) Consecrated today, rule the kingdom by adopting the same path followed by your grandfathers and greatgrandfathers.
Once Rama assumes kingship, we shall all live in happiness greater than when we were ruled by his father and grandfather.
If only we can see Rama enthroned today and going in a procession, there will be no need for food and no greater object of life to be accomplished.
For us, there is nothing dearer in the kingdom than the consecration of Rama of undimmed brilliance.
Indifferent to such warm words by his friends in his favour Rama passed along the highway.
Even though Rama, the best among men had driven past them none was able to withdraw his mind or eyes from him. (They continued).
'Whoever does not see Rama or Rama does not see him, will be blamed by all men in the (three) worlds. Even his self will blame him.
That righteous Rama shows compassion to all, to the four castes, to the young and the old. So they were devoted to him.
The son of the king proceeded, leaving on his right, squares (intersections of four roads), and roads leading to temples, monuments and shrines too.
That prince (Rama) arrived at the excellent palace of the king, which looked like the abode of Indra on earth, blazing with splendour. The various towers of the palace touching the sky resembled clusters of white clouds, like auspicious peaks of Kailasa, and like white aerial chariots decorated with gems.
Rama, the best among men, crossed the first three courtyards which were protected by bowmen on horses and crossed the remaining two on foot.
Crossing the courtyards on his way Rama sent back his followers and entered the private apartment of the king.
When the prince approached his father all the people were delighted and  awaited his return like the ocean waiting for the rise of the Moon.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तदशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventeenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Rama beheld his father reclined on an auspicious couch and by his side was seated Kaikeyi. He looked wretched with a pale face.
With all humility and wellcomposed mind, he made reverential salutation first at his father's feet and thereafter at Kaikeyi's.
Dasaratha uttered the word 'Rama', but thereafter could neither say any more in  distress nor look at him becuase his eyes were brimming with tears.
Never before did Rama see such frightful appearance of his father. He was seized with fear as if  he trampled a serpent.
Maharaja (Dasaratha) with his senses dulled had become emaciated due to sorrow and suffering. With an agitated and troubled mind, he was breathing heavily. Although unshakable, he looked agitated like an ocean with successive rows of waves, like  the  Sun in eclipse, like an ascetic who has uttered falsehood.
The more Rama reflected on the incomprehensible sorrow of the king, the more he became perturbed like an ocean on the new Moon day.
Devoted to his father's wellbeing, Rama reflected, Why does not father reciprocate my greeting (like on other days)?
On other occasions even though angry he would feel pleased. But today  why does he feel sad even after seeing me?
With a sorrowful countenance Rama made salutation to Kaikeyi and said like a wretch tormented with grief:
Have I committed any offence unknowingly? Please tell me why my father is angry with me. You alone can pacify him.
Father has always been affectionate to me but today why is he in a dejected mood?  Why does his countenance look pale and wretched? Why does he not speak to me?
Is he suffering from any physical ailment or mental agony? It is affliction of either the body or the mind. (For) perpetual happiness is indeed rare.
Has any misfortune befallen the handsome Bharata or the mighty Satrughna or any of my mothers?
If I have (ever) displeased the maharaja, my father or disobeyed his command which has angered him, I do not wish to live for a moment৷৷
How can a man who owes his origin (birth) in this world to him (father) who still exists as a visible god not conduct himself (as per his wish)?
Have you said anything harsh to my father out of anger or (injured) selfrespect for which his mind has been shaken?
O Devi I am repeatedly asking you the cause of this unprecedented change in the king please tell me the truth.
When Kaikeyi was thus asked by the magnanimous scion of the Raghus (Rama) she uttered unashamed these impudent words in her own interest.
O Rama, the king is neither angry, nor has any misforturne befallen him. But out of fear for you he is not able to speak out what he has in mind.
The goddess of speech does not permit him to say an unpleasant thing to you for you are his beloved son. So you must fulfil the promise he has made to me.
In the past the king had honoured me with (two) boons. Now like any other common man he is repenting (for the same).
The king bestowed on me boons saying, 'I shall grant you two boons'. But now he wishes in vain to build a dam when the water has run down.
O Rama, this (truth) is the basis of righteousness. The virtuous also know this. The king being angry (with me), should not abandon the truth for your sake.
If you fulfil whatever the king says, pleasant or unpleasant, I shall relate to you everything.
If you do not transgress the word given by the king I shall tell you everything. The king on his own will not tell you.
Very much depressed on hearing the words of Kaikeyi, Rama thus said to her in the presence of the king:
Alas, what a pity, O queen, it does not behove you to speak to me such words. I can jump into fire. Since he is my father, preceptor and wellwisher, I shall consume deadly poison or even get drowned in the sea if he so commands.
Hence tell me, O Devi Whatever be the desire of the king: I promise I shall carry out, Rama does not say two things (does not go back on his word).
To Rama who was devoted to truth and to rectitude of conduct the ignobale Kaikeyi said:
O descendant of Raghu in the great war between gods and demons in the past your father had granted me two boons for protecting him when he was wounded by a shaft.
O scion of the Raghus, hence I have asked the king for consecration of Bharata and your departure to Dandaka forest today itself.
O the best of men if you want to be true to the word given by you and your father, listen to what I say.
Abide by your father's command. As promised by him go to the forest for fourteen years.
Bharata shall be consecrated, O descendant of the Raghu dynasty with all these preparations made by the king to install you.
Forsake this consecration, wear matted locks and deerskin and take refuge in Dandaka forest for fourteen years.
Let Bharata live in Ayodhya, the capital of Kosala and rule this kingdom rich in gems of different kinds in horses, chariots and elephants.
This is why the king with his face tortured by tears and (his heart) overwhelmed with compassion for you, is unable to look at you.
O Joy of the Raghus, O son of the Raghu race, carry out the word of promise given by the king and save him by helping him keep the truth which is great.
Even though she was speaking harsh words, Rama did not come to grief. But the magnanimous king was greatly afflicted to see the calamity on his son.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टादशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eighteenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the oly Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The destroyer of enemies (Rama) did not feel distressed to hear these words painful like death. To Kaikeyi he said:
Be it so I shall go from here to the forest and live there with matted hair and deerskin to keep the promise of the king.
Nevertheless I would like to know why king Dasaratha, an unassailable subduer of enemies does not greet me as usual.
O Devi you should not grieve. I declare in your presence that I shall go to the forest wearing tattered clothes (bark) and matted locks. Rejoice (to hear this).
Ordered by my father who is my wellwisher, my guru, one with a sense of gratidude and, above all a king, shall I not, without hesitation do what pleases him?
One thing which hurts me is that the king himself did not tell me about Bharata's  consecration. That alone is burning my heart.
Unurged, I would have gladly given to Bharata the kingdom, wealth, my most coveted life, and even Sita.
In order to keep the promise I shall do everything to fulfil your desire. Needless to say that my father has ordered this.
Please console him. Why is it that the king with his eyes fixed upon the ground is shedding tears drop by drop?
With the king's orders let messengers go right away on swift horses to fetch Bharata from his maternal uncle's house.
As for me, without deliberating on the propriety of my father's orders, I shall go from here at once to Dandaka forest to live (there) for fourteen years.
Kaikeyi, happy to hear the words of the son of the Raghus as she was convinced that his departure (to the forest) was certain, hastened him (to set out).
Let it be so. Messengers shall go at once on swift horses to bring Bharata from his maternal uncle's house.
Since you are eager (to go to the forest), I do not think it is proper to delay. O Rama therefore it behoves you to proceed immediately from here to the forest.
Out of shame the king is unable to speak to you. There is nothing other than this. O Rama, the best of men, dispel this distress (of mind).
O Rama, as long as you do not hasten to leave this city for the forest, your father will neither bathe nor eat.
'Fie, what a calamity' sighing thus, the king, overwhelmed with sorrow, fainted and fell back on the golden couch.
Rama lifted up the king and, urged by Kaikeyi, hastened to depart for the forest like a horse flogged by a whip.
Rama listened to the dreadful, cruel words of the ignoble woman but, without feeling any sorrow, said to Kaikeyi, these words:
O Devi, I have no desire to live in this world for the sake of wealth. Know me as one with the sages who are devoted only to righteousness.
If I am able to do anything which pleases my venerable father, it shall be done in every possible manner, may be even at the cost of my life.
There is no greater observance of righteousness than doing service to one's father or carrying out his orders.
Though this has not been said by my respectable father himself, I shall live in the forlorn forest for fourteen years in accordance with your word.
Since in my case you have exercised more authority (than my father) and pleaded with the king, it follows, you, for sure, do not see any virtue in me, O Kaikeyi (Or else, you should not have asked for Bharata's kingship).
After taking leave of my mother and consoling Sita, today itself I shall go to that wild  Dandaka forest.
It is your bounden duty to see that Bharata rules the kingdom and serves father.
Father (Dasaratha), too tormented with grief to speak cried out loudly on hearing the words of Rama.
Effulgent Rama  bowed at the feet of his father who had fallen into a swoon. He bowed at the feet of the ignoble Kaikeyi and set out.
Hardly had Rama withdrawn from the harem after circumambulating his father and Kaikeyi when he saw his friends .
Lakshmana, the enhancer of Sumitra's delight, with his eyes brimming with tears, followed him in a rage.
Rama circumambulated the vessels meant for the consecration ceremony and steadily glancing at them with attention slowly moved away.
Rama was the beloved of the people. Loss of kingdom did not diminish his splendour just like night cannot diminish the splendour of the coolrayed Moon.
Rama was determined to renounce the kingdom and go to the forest. So none could see any change in his mind. (For) he was one beyond all worldly affairs.
Selfpossessed Rama held back his sorrow within his mind, abandoned the auspicious umbrella, welldecorated fans and chariot, sent away kinsmen, citydwellers and others and entered his mother's residence to break the unpleasant news.
All the glorious people around him did not observe any change in the countenance of that dignified and truthful Rama.
The mightyarmed (Rama) did not leave his habitual cheerfulness like the autumnal Moon his own brightness.
Firmminded and illustrious Rama treated all people with sweet words and approached his mother.
Mighty Lakshmana as virtuous as his brother held the sorrow in his mind and followed him.
Rama entered  the palace which was full of great rejoicing. He did not disclose the obstruction that had come on the way of achieving his objective for fear of causing distress to his friends. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the nineteenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
When the tiger among men (Rama) was coming out with folded palms, there arose a huge cry of distress among the ladies of the harem:
Rama was the refuge and protector of all the inmates lot of the inner apartment although it was not his duty nor was he forced by his father to safeguard them. That Rama is now going on exile.
Rama conducted himself towards us in the same way as he did towards his mother Kausalya right from the begining.
Rama who used to avoid deeds that caused anger, pacified those who were angry with him, and never lost his cool even when cursed, that Rama is going on exile today.
Alas our king who has lost his brain, who has ordered the banishment of Rama, the refuge of all living beings, (on the other hand) is moving about in the world.
Thus all the queens like calfless cows cried loudly blaming their husband.
Tormented with grief on account of his son, the king sank in his seat on hearing the cries of distress from the inner apartment
Deeply pained yet selfpossessed Rama, heaving sighs like an elephant went towards the inner apartment of his mother along with his brother.
Rama beheld a highly venerable elderly man seated at the entrance of the residence and many others standing (nearby).
On seeing Rama, all the eminent among the victors got up immediately and greeted him, saying, 'Victory to you'.
With the first courtyard crossed, Rama saw in the second aged brahmins versed in the Vedas, and duly honoured by the king.
Rama wished the brahmins and saw old men, women and children vigilantly guarding the door in the third courtyard.
Wellpleased, the women then greeted him wishing prosperity. They hurried into the abode of Kausalya and gave her the happy news (of Rama's arrival).
Having spent the night with a composed mind (abosorbed in meditation), Kausalya was worshipping lord Visnu in the early morning to secure her son's welfare.
Always engaged in the observance of vows, Kausalya (then) clad in silk cloth was performing rituals of auspiciousness, offering oblations to the firegod in accordance with mantras (Vedic hymns).
Rama entered the auspicious inner apartment of his mother and saw her exhorting the priests to offer sacrificial oblations to Agni (firegod).
There Rama saw  curd, grains of rice, clarified butter, sweetmeats, oblations, parched grain, white garlands, porridge of cooked rice mixed with sesame seeds, sacrirficial faggots, vessels filled with water, etc. kept ready for religious rites.
Kausalya, emaciated due to observance of vows and clad in white silk looked like a celestial being. She was engaged in offering libations to the deities.
Seeing her son who had come after a long time and who is a source of joy to his mother, Kausalya approached him with great delight like a mare to her young calf.
The scion of the Raghus saw his mother coming and bowed her. She held him in both her arms and kissed his forehead.
Out of love for her son, the invincible scion of the Raghu dynasty, Kausalya spoke with gentle and pleasant words:
May you attain long life and fame like those of the aged, virtuous and great rajarsis  who upheld the righteousness in the race.
O scion of the Raghu race see the king, your righteous and truthful father, who will consecrate you as princeregent today itself.
Invited (by Kausalya) to partake the food, Rama out of abashment only touched the seat provided to him and having stretched his folded palms spoke to his mother.
Modest by nature, Rama with respectful humility began seeking her permission for his departure to Dandaka forest:
O mother surely you do not know that a great misfortune has befallen, causing distress to you, Sita and Lakshmana, too.
I am setting forth to Dandaka forest.  What is this seat for? A time has come for me when I am fit for a seat of kusa grass.
Abstaining from eating meat like hermits and living on honey, fruits and roots, I am to live in the solitary forest for fourteen years.
The great king is conferring the status of heirapparent on Bharata while he is banishing me to Dandaka forest to live like an ascetic.
Living on things available in the forest, on fruits and roots, I am to dwell in the uninhabited jungle for fourteen years.
All on a sidden Kausalya fell down on the ground like the branch of a sal tree in the forest severed by an axe, like a goddess dropped from heaven.
Seeing his mother who had done nothing to deserve (this) suffering and who had fallen down like a plantain tree, deprived of her senses, Rama raised her up (from the ground).
Rama gently wiped away the dust that had covered her body as Kausalya stood miserable, like a mare who stands up after having rolled on the ground while pulling the load.
Kausalya who deserved happiness yet was struck down by (this) distress spoke to Rama, the tiger among men who was sitting nearby, while Lakshmana was listening.
O my son, if you were not born to me, I, even as a woman without  progeny, would not have experienced grief, more intense than this.
O my son a barren woman has only one mental agony that she has no progeny.  Except that she does not have any other sorrow.
I did not have the fortune, O Rama, to enjoy any auspicious moment or pleasure earlier when my husband was in authority. I exist with the hope that I will have it when my son assumes authority.
I, being the eldest (of the queens) will have to listen to many heartbreaking and unpleasant words from my fellowwives who are younger to me.
There cannnot be greater distress for any woman than such unending grief and lamentation (which I am now experiencing).
O child even when you are nearby I am neglected like this. What to say when you are banished. Death is certain to me.
Treating me as an equal or inferior to the attendants of Kaikeyi and making me always dependent, my husband has greatly suppressed me.
Any one who serves me or follows me will not talk to me after seeing Bharata (installed as heirapparent).
Fallen into an unfortunate state how can I look at Kaikeyi's face who is always harsh and in temper?
O Rama, I have spent the last seventeen years after your birth with the expectaion that my sorrows would come to an end.
Therefore, O Rama, I cannot at this old age endure this great, endless sorrow and the insults from cowives for long.
Without beholding your face that is as bright as the full Moon, how can this wretched woman live this pitiable life?
Through meditation, through fasts and with a great deal of efforts you have been brought up by this luckless (mother). But alas this is all in vain.
I think my heart must be very firm (hard) like the bark of a great river which, touched by (a flood of) fresh water in the rainy season does not disintegrate.
There is no room for me in the abode of Yama (the god of death). If he does not carry me off forcibly like a lion carrying away a crying female deer, certainly there is no death for me.
Surely my still (hard) heart is made of iron. It neither bursts nor breaks down on the ground. Pervaded by grief, there is no untimely death for this my body, too.
My regret is that all my mortifications, gifts of charity and penances are of no avail. Even the asceticism which I practised for the sake of progeny was fruitless like a seed sown in a barren land.
If any one, tormented with great sorrow, could willingly commit suicide I would have gone the way to the assembly of Yama (the lord of death) right away as without you I will be now like a cow without a calf.
What is the use of this life now? What is life without you whose countenance glows like the full Moon? Like a cow emaciated by its search for the calf, I will follow you into the forest.
Kausalya, filled with anger due to extreme sorrow reflected over her misfortune, and burst into harrowing tears, looking at Rama, like a kinnari looking at her grownup son taken captive. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे विंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentieth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
While Rama's mother, Kausalya was lamenting, miserable Lakshmana said to her these words appropriate to the occasion:
O venerable one, I do not like that Rama should go to the forest yielding to the words of a woman and renouncing the welfare of the kingdom.
The king  has a perverse nature. He is aged. He is overpowered by passions. He is under the spell of carnal pleasures and is incited (by Kaikeyi). Such a man can speak anything.
I do not see any fault in Rama nor any offence committed by him for which he is exiled from the kingdom.
I do not find anybody in this world, even an adversary or one defeated, who finds fault with him even in his absence.
With no cause nor concern for righteousness, will any one abandon his son who is nearly equal to god, upright, selfrestrained and loved even by his enemies ?
Will any son with the ideals of a king in mind accept such words of this king who has entered his chilhood again ?
Before this news is known to any one bring the kingdom under your control with my assistance.
O Rama who can commit excesses on you, when you stand like  Yama, god of death, protected by me with my bow?
O best of men, if the whole of Ayodhya stands against you I shall depopulate it with my sharp arrows.
I shall slay all of them who support Bharata and those who seek his prosperity. A gentleman is treated with disgrace indeed.
Even if our father instigated by Kaikeyi becomes our enemy, he shall be imprisoned or even slain regardless of our relationship with him.
Even a preceptor who follows the unrighteous path and is filled with haughtiness and does not know how to discriminate between good and bad, deserves to be disciplined (punished).
O best of men, under what authority or reason this king wants to confer on Kaikeyi the kingdom  that rightfully belongs to you?
What authority, O Rama, chastiser of foes, this king has to bestow the kingdom upon Bharata by entering into undesirable hostility towards you and me?
O mother, (Lakshmana now tells Kausalya) I am truly loyal to my brother from the bottom of my heart. I swear this by my bow, on my merits earned through charity, by my truthfulness and by the good deeds I have done.
O mother rest assured should Rama enter a blazing fire or a forest I must have already entered it.
Like the rising Sun dispelling darkness, I shall eliminate your sorrow. O mother Let Rama see my valour. You, too.
Having heard the words of the magnanimous Lakshmana, Kausalya, depressed and weeping, said to Rama:
O my son you have heard what your brother Lakshmana said and if it pleases you, do later what is to be done.
By heeding the unrighteous words of my cowife (Kaikeyi) it does not behove you to leave me griefstricken and go away from here.
You are righteous. You know your duty. If you wish to follow the path of righteousness, stay here, serve me and follow the best of dharma.
O son Kasyapa who led a life of selfdiscipline and served his mother at home, attained heaven credited with (the merit of) the highest penance.
Just as the king is worthy of your respectful homage, so am I. I will not permit you to go from here to the forest.
Separated from you, I have no use of this life or happiness. I prefer to live with you even if it means eating grass.
If you depart for the forest leaving me griefstricken I cannot live. Here I shall seek death by fasting.
O son you will then fall into hell. As wellknown in the world, the ocean, the lord of rivers, incurred the guilt of slaying a brahmin through unrighteous conduct.
Thereafter, virtuous Rama addressed these words consistent with righteousness to his miserable mother Kausalya who was thus lamenting:
I do not have the power to transgress the orders of my father. Bowing my head I beseech you,  allow me to go to the forest.
Learned sage Kandu who knew what is righteousness and a strict observant of vows, slew a cow for carrying out the command of his father.
Earlier the sons of Sagara, born in our family, while excavating the earth by the order of their father met a terrible death.
Parasurama, son of Jamadagni himself in obedience to the words of his father, decapitated his mother Renuka in the forest with an axe.
All of them including many other godlike persons, O Mother fulfilled the words of their father. I shall also make my father's wish come true.
I am not O Devi the only one obeying my father's command. All I have mentioned to you did.
I am not advancing anything new, contrary to the existing practice. I am only following the trodden path of our ancestors.
I will not do as duty anything contrary to what is done by others in this world. No one who obeys the commands of his father falls off the path of righteousness.
One who is the best among the knowers of speech and best of all archers, Rama spoke to his mother in this manner and then said to Lakshmana:
I know, O Lakshmana, your profound affection for me. I also know your valour,  strength and unassailable energy.
O Lakshamana of auspicious qualities, since my mother is not aware of the significance of truth and selfrestraint, she is overcome with grief, great and incomparable.
Righteousness alone is supreme in this world and truth is established in righteousness. This excellent command of our father is supported by righteousness.
Any one, O hero, who has taken recourse to righteousness should not  allow the promise made to his father,  mother or a brahmin to go in vain.
O hero I cannot transgress the command of my father since at his instance only Kaikeyi urged me (to go to the forest).
Therefore, leave this ignoble thought, resort to the duty of a kshatriya, take the righteous path. Do not adopt violence. Follow my decision.
Speaking affectionately to his brother Lakshmana, Rama with folded hands and head bowed  again addressed Kausalya:
I have decided, O mother to go to the forest from here. Grant me the permission to do so. I swear on my life. Perform all the ceremonies for securing prosperity for me.
Like rajarshi Yayati of yore who lost heaven and rejained it, I shall return from the forest to the city (of Ayodhya) after the vow is fulfilled.
Do not grieve, O mother Be prudent enough to subdue your sorrow in your heart. Having fulfilled father's words, I shall come back from my sojourn in the forest.
You, Sita, Lakshmana, Sumitra and I -- all of us shall abide by the words of my father. This indeed is eternal law.
O mother in withdrawing the articles (for consecration) and also in subduing the sorrow in your heart approve of my plan to dwell in the forest.
Having heard these words so unruffled and tranquil which conformed to  righteousness, mother (Kausalya), like a dead person regaining consciousness spoke to Rama again:
By virtue of my own duty and affection towards you, O my son I am as much your preceptor as your father is. I will not grant you permission. You should not go, leaving me deeply distressed.
What is the purpose of my life in this world without you? What purpose do I have with  the other world or with the oblations (offered to manes) or with nectar (availble to the gods). I would prefer one moment in your company to the whole world of living beings (without you).
At the (inconsolable) lamentations of his mother, Rama was in flames (within) like a mighty elephant prevented from entering the highway by men with fireworks.
Rama, centred on righteousness, again addressed his mother who had almost  fainted and Lakshmana who was deeply distressed. As his words were consistent with righteousness, he alone was competent to speak that way.
I know your devotion (to me) and your valour, O Lakshmana But now, without understanding my intention you are causing me and mother severe pain and torment.
Dharma,artha and kama, O my dear are adjudged in this world according to the fruits of righteous action. All these three are doubtless there (in my decision to go to the forest), like obedience in a wife and love for the mother in good sons.
If actions which combine these three (dharma, artha and kama), cannot be performed (which is likely), resort to righteousness. (For) one who seeks wealth is abhorred and one who seeks fulfilment of desires does not attract admiration in this world.
Whatever a preceptor, an old man, a king and a father commands whether it is out of anger or pleasure or passion must be carried out as dharma. Who will not do it unless he is heartless?
It is impossible for me not to execute the promise completely, O my dear, he (Dasaratha) is our preceptor and, therefore, fit to command us. Even for  mother Kausalya, he is her husband, her refuge and her dharma.
While the righteous king is living, more importantly treading the righteous path, how can mother Kausalya, like an ordinary widow, accompany me leaving this city?
Grant me permission O mother, to depart for the forest. Bless me and perform ceremonies for my wellbeing so that I shall return (to the city) after completion (of my exile) like Yayati (who came back to heaven) with the strength of truth.
I will not forsake this great glory (of fulfilling my father's promise) for the sake of the kingdom. In this transient existence O mother, I do not wish to acquire this insignificant earth unrighteously.
Rama, the best among men, thus pacified his mother insisting on his desire to depart for Dandaka forest with courage. And elaborately instructed his brother about his good intentions after which he circumambulated his mother with all his heart.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyfirst sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The selfpossessed Rama held his composure and approached his beloved, intimate brother Lakshmana who was (looking) miserable with his mental agony. To him, who was hissing like a king cobra, he said:
Restrain your anger and sorrow. Dismiss this humiliation (from the mind). Achieve great happiness through fortitude. Remove whatever preparations have been made for the purpose of (my) consecration today, and act quickly so that there is no obstacle.
O Lakshmana the same enthusiasm with which preparations for my consecration were made be shown for the cessation of those arrangements.
Act in such a way that our mother (Kaikeyi), whose heart ached due to my consecration should not entertain any doubt.
Even for a moment, O Lakshmana I am not inclined to ignore her sorrow caused by the apprehension in her mind (about the possibility of Rama's coronation).
I do not remember to have done anything any time with a motive or without understanding which might have caused even a little displeasure to father or mothers.
Let my father who is always truthful, who is really valiant, who is always striving for truth and who is afraid of the next world, be fearless.
If the preparations for the consecration are not withdrawn, my father will suffer mental agony for the fear that his word has not come true and his agony will torment me.
Therefore, O Lakshmana I want the arrangement for coronation withdrawn before I proceed to the forest from here itself.
Immediately after my departure to the forest, the king's (Kekaya's) daughter having accomplished her objective, will enthrone Bharata without any distraction.
Kaikeyi will attain peace of mind only after my departure to the forest in tattered clothes, an antelope skin and a crown of matted locks.
With wellcomposed mind this decision has been taken. I do not like to inflict pain (on Dasaratha or Kaikeyi). I shall, therefore, depart to the forest without delay.
If the award of the kingdom to me is revoked, O Lakshmana, and if I am banished in this manner, see, it is destiny.
If this thought and my misfortune were not caused in Kaikeyi by destiny, how could she muster such determination to inflict pain on me?
You know, O gentle Lakshmana that never in the past had I any feeling of  distinction amongst my mothers. And Kaikeyi never differentiated between me and her son.
I do not find any reason other than destiny for the cruel and brutal words spoken by Kaikeyi with the objective of preventing my coronation and exiling me.
If destiny is not the cause behind this, how could Kaikeyi who is gifted with virtues and a noble nature speak such painful words to me before her husband, like an ordinary woman?
Inconceivable is the power of destiny. Its impact on all beings cannot be averted. That  an adversity has befallen me and Kaikeyi is (therefore) evident.
O Lakshmana which mortal has the power to fight with destiny the grip of which can be comprehended  by following its course only through its effect and nowhere else.
Happiness or misery, fear or anger, gain or loss, birth or death, and all such things  are surely the acts of destiny.
Even rishis with severe austerities are tormented by destiny and are swerved from  their observances because of anger and passion.
Any unanticipated and sudden hindrance to the action undertaken shall be deemed to be the act of destiny.
Even though my consecration was thwarted, there is no feeling of sadness in me. In fact I controlled my mind by my intellect.
Therefore, be free from grief like me and revoke all the arrangements made for the consecration ceremony immediately.
With these very pots (of holy water) brought for the purpose of consecration, O Lakshmana I shall take bath at the time of taking vow for practising penance.
Or else, for me what is the use of these pots of holy water which are the king's property? The water drawn with my own hands will be made use of for my religious bath.
Do not grieve, O Lakshmana, over the loss of the kingdom. Living in exile is more glorious than running the kingdom.
O Lakshmana our younger mother (Kaikeyi) cannot be blamed for her obstruction to my coronation. Overpowered by destiny, she is speaking such unpleasant words. This you know is the impact of destiny.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्वाविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentysecond sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
While Rama was speaking thus, Lakshmana listened to him with his head down, experiencing both grief and joy.
Lakshmana, frowning between his eyebrows, hissed like a great serpent seized with anger in its hole.
With his frown, his face looked frightening like the face of a lion provoked.
Shaking his forearm like an elephant raising its trunk, moving his neck horizontally and vertically and casting a pointed and oblique look at his brother, Lakshmana said:
O Rama, the greatest among the brave kshatriyas you say this because of your fear that (by disobeying father's command) harm will be done to righteousness. This great haste is unwarranted for there is the least apprehension about people's verdict (in favour of exile). How do you, of all persons, speak about destiny as allpowerful in these circumstances when it is powerless?
Why do you extol this pitiable and powerless destiny? Why don't you doubt those two vicious persons (Dasaratha and Kaikeyi)?
Why don't you realise, O virtuous one that there are soft means of creating hindrances in their plan without trangressing dharma. You know dharma. Why don't you understand that their acts of deception wear the guise of dharma?
If both of them had not decided before, O Rama the boon granted to Kaikeyi naturally would have been fulfilled long ago.
The consecration of any one other than you, O valiant one is universally detested. I do not want to tolerate (this act). You should pardon me in this matter.
O noble minded one I hate this righteousness which has deluded your intellect and created this dilemma about this issue.
When you are able to counter (this move), why do you want to execute the unjustifiable and contemptible words of the king who is under the spell of Kaikeyi?
I am grieved that even though this plot has been hatched by a treacherous mind, you are not taking it in the right perspective. Censurable is adherence to virtue.
As both of them are steeped in passion, they never thought of your wellbeing. How will you fulfil the wishes of these enemies miscalled parents?
It might be your opinion that their dictate is the decree of destiny. Even then, it does not satisfy me. It (destiny) should be ignored.
Those who are timid and cowardly alone depend on destiny.The valiant with of selfrespect will not accept it.
In the case of one capable of striking destiny with human efforts it cannot defeat his objective and bring him despondency.
Today all will witness the power of destiny and the power of man. The difference between man and destiny will be manifested today.
Today people will see destiny defeated by my valour just as they saw your consecration defeated (obstructed) by destiny.
I will make destiny, the elephant, running wild on the strength of the rut, unmanageable (even) by the goad, turn back with my valour.
All the guardians of the quarters and all the three worlds united cannot prevent the consecration of Rama today, what to speak of our father (king Dasaratha).
O king those who, with mutual support banished you to the forest, will themselves  dwell in the forest for fourteen years.
Therefore, I shall frustrate the desire of father and of  Kaikeyi who plans the kingdom for her son by obstructing your consecration.
Any one who opposes my terrible valour will come to grief. The power of destiny will not cause that much sorrow as my valour will.
When after ruling the subjects for a thousand years you withdraw into the forest (for yativrata) your sons will rule them.
Leaving their sons to look after the subjects as their own children, the rajarsis in  ancient times used to retire into the forest as per practice.
O righteous one, if you apprehend chaos in the kingdom for want of wholehearted support from the (feudatory) kings then, O my valiant brother, I swear to you, I will protect your kingdom like the shore protecting the ocean. Or else, I shall never attain the afterworld of heroes.
The consecration may be performed with these auspicious materials. I am alone capable of facing these kings with my valour.
These my arms are not intended to enhance the beauty (of my body). This bow is not for decoration. The sword is not for the sake of strapping my waist. The arrows are not meant to be fixed to my quiver. All these four are meant for taming my enemies.
Any one who turns my enemy will not be allowed to remain alive. Holding my sharpedged sword, lustrous as a flash of lightning, I shall  exterminate my enemy even if it were Indra, the bearer of thunder.
This entire earth will become impenetrable and impassable, scattered with the trunks, thighs and heads of elephants, horses and warriors hacked off with my sword.
The elephants, struck by the blows of my sword, will fall on earth like mountains engulfed in flames and like clouds with lightning.
When I stand before men (enemies) wearing godha and fingerprotector, holding the bow ready, who amongst men will boast of his manliness?
Striking each of my foes with many arrows and many with one arrow, I shall aim them at the vitals of men, horses and elephants.
O Lord today you shall see the power of my glorious weapons in depriving the king (Dasaratha) of his authority and establishing your supremacy over the kingdom.
These arms, O Rama which are fit for sandalwood cream, for wearing armlets, for distributing wealth and for protecting friends, will perform the worthy act of subduing those who are creating obstruction to your consecration.
Tell me your enemy who should be deprived of his life, fame and friends. Command me as to how this earth shall come under your control. Now itself I shall do that. I am your servant.
Having perceived that Rama was determined to carry out his father's command, Kausalya with her throat choked with tears said these words of piety:
How will this righteous Rama, born to me through Dasaratha, who speaks pleasantly to all, and who has not experienced any sorrow before live on the grains gleaned?
How will Rama live on roots and fruits in the forest hereafter when his servants and attendants enjoy delicious food (here)?
Who will believe that the virtuous and affectionate scion of the Raghus is exiled this way by the king? Who will not tremble in fear to hear this?
O Rama if you, being the delight of the world, are (ordered) to go to the forest, it has to be said certainly that destiny which rules everything is allpowerful.
After your departure, O son, an incomparably huge fire of grief with sighs of exhaustion will burst from my body, fanned by the wind of your absence and fuelled by lamentation and affliction. My wailing tears will be the oblations. My anxiety will be the great smoke rising vapour. This fire of grief will leave me very much emaciated and burn me like fire burns a forest of dead trees or a bunch of dry grass in summer.
I shall follow you wherever you go, my son, like a cow following its calf. How is it possible for a cow not to follow its wandering calf?
At these words of his mother who was deeply afflicted Rama, best among men replied:
The king was deceived by Kaikeyi. If you also desert him after I have gone to the forest, surely he will not live.
For a woman, to desert her husband is a cruel act. You must not do that which is  contemptible even to think.
As long as the king, my father, the lord of the earth, a descendant of Kakutshta lives, you shall serve him. This is eternal virtue (in a woman).
At these words of Rama, unshakable in action, auspiciouslooking Kausalya, exceedingly pleased said 'Be it so'.
Thus addressed, Rama, the foremost among upholders of righteousness, said to his mother who was in deep grief:
You and I should obey father's words. He is the king, supporter, preceptor, the best (among men) and  lord and master of all of us.
Roaming the wild forest for fourteen years I shall abide by your words with supreme pleasure.
Thus addressed by Rama, the affectionate Kausalya, deeply distressed, her eyes filled with tears, said to her beloved son:
O Rama, I am not able to live in the midst of these cowives. O descendant of Kakutstha, if you have resolved to go to the forest as per the wishes of your father take mea wild deeralong with you into the forest.
Adding his tears to his mother's who was wailing Rama said As long as a woman lives, her husband is her god and also her lord (master).
The powerful king has authority over you as well as over me. As long as he is the sagacious lord of the entire world, how can we be without a master?
Bharata, who is virtuous and speaks pleasantly to all beings and who is always attached to righteousness will surely remain obedient to you.
After my departure, you must see that the king is not  overpowered by grief for his son and struggles as little as possible.
See that the old king does not succumb to this terrible grief. Serve him with a composed mind.
A woman may be highly pious engaged in vows and fastings, but if she does not follow her husband, she will be condemned to hell.
A woman who serves her husband will attain the highest heaven even if she pays no homage to gods and abstains from worshipping them.
A wife who serves her husband and who is engaged in doing good to him is righteous. This dharma exists in this world since ancient times, declared in the Vedas and the smritis.
For my sake, O devi worship the firegod with offerings of oblations and flowers, and brahmins who are true to religious vows.
Looking forward to my return, spend your time this way with moderate intake, a mind under control and a life devoted to the service of your husband.
If my father, who is the best among the upholders of righteousness, survives till I come back, you will have your highest desires fulfilled.
To these words of Rama, Kausalya, distressed with grief for her son, replied with her eyes filled with tears:
I am unable to dissuade you, O my brave son, from your firm resolve to go to the forest. It is surely difficult (for me) to bide time.
Go with a steadfast mind, O my son May god be gracious. Only with your return, I shall be relieved of my suffering.
O reverend one, when you come back after having accomplished your purpose, performed your vows and acquitted yourself of the debt you owe your father, I shall attain supreme happiness.
O Rama inconceivable is the course of destiny which is inciting you to go to the forest disregarding my words.
Go now, O my mightyarmed son and come back safe. And on your return, delight me with your sweet, gentle utterances.
O my dear child, how pleasing would it be, if today were to be the day of your return from the forest when I can see you wearing matted hair and robes of bark
Seeing Rama full of auspicious qualities resolved to go to the forest and having spoken to him with the fullness of her heart, Devi Kausalya now braced herself up to perform ceremonies in the interest of  Rama's wellbeing.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुर्विंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyfourth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Highminded mother Kausalya, her anguish subdued, performed the sipping rite (achamana) and her self rendered pure, performed auspicious ceremonies for Rama.
I am unable to dissuade you, O the best among the descendants of Raghus, from going into the forest. Go now and return soon. Follow in the footsteps of the virtuous.
The duty which you are carrying out with courage and selfdiscipline, O tiger among the descendants of Raghu will alone protect you.
O my son may the gods in the temples and in other sacred places and the maharshis you bow to protect you in the forest
May the weapons endowed with mantric qualities, which were bestowed on you by sagacious Viswamitra always protect you
O my mighty armed son protected by the service to your father, mother and to truth, live long
O best of men may sacrificial fuel, kusa grass and sacred rings made of kusha grass, sacrificial altars, temples, various levelled sacrificial grounds, mountains, trees, plants, lakes, birds, serpents and lions protect you
May all gods known as Sadhyas, Visvedevatas, Maruts, great ascetics, the sustainer (Virat Purusha), the preserver of creation (lord Brahma), Sun, Bhaga, Aryama, and all other important guardians of the world headed by Indra bestow their blessings on you
May the six seasons, years, months, fortnights, nights, days and moments bring good to you
O my son may Smriti, Dhriti and Dharma always guard you. May divine personages and gods, Skanda, Soma, Brihaspati, the seven rishis and Narada protect you at all times
May Siddhas, guardians of the quarters invoked by me protect you from all  directions in that forest at all times, O my son
When you dwell in the forest may all the mountains, seas, lord Varuna, heaven, space, and earth and also all rivers, all stars and planets with their presiding deities, day, night, dawn and dusk protect you
May all the six pious seasons, months, years, kala and kashta contribute to your wellbeing
May gods and demons always give you happiness when you wander in that great forest clad in ascetic garb
Let there be no fear from rakshasas who are fearful to look at and commit cruel acts, from pisachas (evil spirits) and from flesheating animals, O my child
May monkeys, scorpions, wild gnats, mosquitoes, reptiles and insects in that inaccessible forest not trouble you
May the mighty elephants, lions with pointed incisors, tigers, bears and fierce, wild, horned buffaloes, do you no harm, O my dear son
May the ferocious breed of cernivores I worship not harm you, O my child
O Rama may your path be auspecious May your valour be fruitful Go safel and achieve success in everything
May gods from the sky, the earth and all other gods protect you and let there be no harm to you from your foes.
Propitiated by my worship, O Rama may Brihaspati, Moon, Sun, Kubera and Yama protect you when you are in Dandaka forest
May Fire, Wind, Smoke and Mantras emanated from the mouths of rishis protect you when you take your ablutions, O Son of the Raghu race O Joy of the Raghus
May Siva, lord of all the worlds, Visnu, supporter of living beings, Brahma, rishis and all the rest of the gods protect you while you dwell in the forest
Thus illustrious, largeeyed Kausalya worshipped hosts of gods by offering them garlands and fragrant substances with appropriate prayers.
After collecting the sacred fire through great brahmins she duly offered oblations to the gods for the welfare of Rama.
Noble Kausalya procured clarified butter, garlands of white flowers, sacred fuel, and grains of white mustard seed (for oblations to the gods).
The officiating priest performed the ritual of sacrificial offerings strictly in accordance   with rules for peace and happiness of Rama. With the remainder of the offerings, he performed whatever ceremonies were to be done externally.
Thereafter she made the brahmins pronounce benedictory prayers, offering honey, curd, rice and clarified butter.Then she got mantras (expiatory rites) recited for averting evil to Rama while in the forest.
The illustrious Kausalya, mother of Rama gave abundant gifts to the best of the brahmins and thereafter said to him:
May the same blessings bestowed by all the gods on the thousandeyed Indra at the time of killing Vritra be with you
May you be conferred with the same blessings which Vinata bestowed on Garuda at the time of bringing nectar
May you be bestowed with the same blessings conferred by Aditi on Indra, the wielder of thunder for the killing of daityas at the time nectar was generated
O Rama by occupying three footsteps of space, highly lustrous Visnu owned the three worlds and obtained glory. May you obtain similar auspiciousness
O mightyarmed Rama may the auspicious and prosperous seasons, seas, islands. the Vedas, the worlds and the quarters bless you
The largeeyed Kausalya placed the remains of the offerings on his (Rama's) head and  applied sandal cream to his body. She tied an auspicious medicinal herb known as Vishalyakarani to his arm for attainment of his objectives, repeatedly muttering prayers.
Even though Kausalya was filled with distress, she appeared as if she was very much happy. She uttered  mere words in a confusing tone without applying her mind.
Illustrious Kausalya embraced Rama, bending his head down and smelt his forehead. And then said O Rama go in peace and come back after accomplishing the objective.
O my son I shall be happy to behold you back in Ayodhya in sound health  successful in your objectives and firmly established in the kingdom.
When you return from the forest like the full Moon rising, I shall behold you with my anxieties gone and my face sparkling with joy.
After you have fulfilled your father's words and returned from your exile I shall behold you seated on the throne, O Rama
O Rama, credited with auspicious events on return from the forest, fulfil my desires and those of my daughterinlaw (Sita).
O son of the Raghu race Lord Siva and other gods, the great rishis, bhutas, great asuras and serpents and four quarters worshipped by me will always promote your welfare when you dwell in the forest.
Thus with her eyes brimming with tears, she duly completed the benedictory rites and  circumambulated the scion of the Raghus and embraced him again and again holding him tight.
Circumambulated by mother Kausalya, the illustrious scion of the Raghu race clasped his mother's feet again and again. And shining in his glory, proceeded to the palace of Sita.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyfifth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
After the benedictory rites were performed by his mother Kausalya, Rama paid obeisance to her and staying on the righteous path decided to depart to the forest. He entered the highway thronged with people and illumining it with his lustre and stirred their hearts with (remembrances of) his excellent virtues.
Sita, her mind preoccupied with thoughts about consecration, was engaged in religious austerities and hence could not hear of all this (development).
Experienced in palace rituals, Sita, grateful (to God) after performing worship of the deities was awaiting in a happy mood the arrival of the prince.
His head bent down in embarrassment, Rama entered his welldecorated residence thronged with excited people.
Sita got up suddenly, (her limbs) trembling to see her husband distressed with grief and agitated with anxiety.
On seeing her, virtuous Rama could not contain the sorrow in his mind which  manifested (through his external appearance).
On seeing Rama with a pale face. indignant and heavily perspiring, Sita, consumed  with grief said, My Lord, why are you now like this?
O scion of the Raghu race, today has been declared by learned brahmins a suitable and auspicious day for consecration under Pushya star with Brihaspati as presiding deity. Then why are you dejected?
How is it that your charming face shines not today under a hundredribbed umbrella (white) like foam in water?
(How is it that) your face, with its lotuslike eyes is not being fanned by excellent fans of the colour of the Moon or the swan.
(How is it that) O best among men eloquent panegyrists, charioteers, bards are not seen singing your praise with auspicious words?
How is it that brahmins versed in the Vedas have not duly sprinkled the mixture of honey and curd on your head (prior to your consecration)?
How is it that welladorned ministers, citizens from towns and villages, heads of guilds and others do not follow you?
How is it that the chief ceremonial chariot, decorated with gold and harnessed by four galloping horses is not preceding you?
How is it that the elephant, whose lustre resembles that of a mountain or a dark cloud and endowed with auspicious features is not seen leading your procession, O valiant one
O heroic one O handsome one how is it that I do not see your attendants proceeding in front with the throne carved in gold?
How is it that when arrangements are under way now for your consecration, the complexion of your countenance does not look like what it was before? There is no joy on your face.
O Sita my venerable father is banishing me to the forest, said Rama, the scion of the Raghus, the joy of the Raghu race, seeing her thus lamenting.
You were born in a noble family. You know and practise dharma. I shall tell you how this banishment has come about. Do listen.
My father, king Dasaratha, true to his promise, had earlier granted two great boons to my mother Kaikeyi.
When the king was preparing for my consecration, she reminded him of the promise and in the name of righteousness he has been cornered.
I am to dwell in the Dandaka forest for fourteen years while father has appointed  Bharata princeregent.
I have come to see you before departing for the desolate Dandaka forest. You should never praise me in the presence of Bharata because intellectuals cannot tolerate others being praised before them. You should never extol my virtues before him.
Never expect special treatment from Bharata. You can (continue to) stay with him (here) by conducting yourself in a favourable manner.
O Sita the king has conferred the hereditary regency on him. Therefore, O Sita, you must make efforts to win his favour, especially a king's.
I am leaving for the forest right away for fulfilling my father's pledge. O highminded Sita be steady.
O sinless, auspicious one engage yourself in vratas and fasting after my departure to the forest inhabited by ascetics.
You must rise in time and with the (household) gods duly worshipped, pay obeisance to my father, king Dasaratha.
In terms of love, affection and service, the rest of my mothers are all equal. Therefore, you must pay them due respect regularly.
What is more important is that you should look on Bharata as your brother and Satrughna as your son. They are dearer to me than my life.
Now Bharata is the king of the country and head of the family. Therefore, you should never do anything disagreeable to him.
Kings are gratified if they are served with zeal and good conduct. If the contrary happens, they get provoked.
Kings abandon (even) their own sons if they are harmful and receive capable people even if they are strangers.
O auspicious one live here by being obedient to king Bharata. Absorbed in righteousness, follow truth and (religious) vows.
O my beloved Sita I am going to the wild forest. Stay here and never cause displeasure to any one in any way. Could you carry out these words of mine?इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षड्विंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentysixth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
When the sweettongued daughter of Videha (Sita) who deserved affection, heard this she was very angry out of her love (for Rama). She said these wordsto her husband (in reply):
O Rama why are you speaking so lightly? O prince if you hear these very same words (spoken to you), you will ridicule me.
O son of a noble monarch father, mother, brother, son or daughterinlaw   (everybody) experiences the merit (of their past deeds) and receives what is due from destiny.
A wife alone, O best of men shares the destiny of her husband. I am also therefore, ordered to dwell in the forest. ( a command to you is a command to me).
It is not her father or mother, nor her son or herself, nor her friends but her husband alone gives a woman the permanent refuge in this or in the next world.
O son of the Raghus if you set out for the impenetrable forest now itself, I shall also go, walking ahead of you and crushing the thorns and (spiky) kusa grass (rendering the path  comfortable for you to walk).
Do take me with you, O valiant one without hesitation. Dismiss all anger and envy (from your mind) like the leftover water after drinking (anger because she disobeys and envy because she, too, like Rama, is willing to brave the hazards of forest life). There is no fault on my part.
Every woman, everywhere be it on the top of mansions or in lovely palaces or flying in the sky should take shelter at his (her husband's) feet (or follow his footsteps).
I have been so instructed by my parents about diverse duties in all stages of life that I need not be told anything (about my duties) now.
I will also go to the forest, which is impassable, uninhabited, teeming with various kinds of animals and infested with tigers and wolves.
Free from any anxiety about the three worlds, my only concern will be my duties towards my husband. I shall dwell as happily in the forest as I did in my father's abode.
I shall wander with you, O heroic Rama in the honeyscented forest remaining selfpossessed, always doing  your service, and observing the vow of celibacy.
O respector of individuals when you are capable of protecting other people in the forest, what of me?
There is no doudt that I shall go with you to the forest today. O distinguished one I cannot be restrained from this resolve.
Do not doubt that I shall not be able to live on fruits and roots or that I will create difficulty for you while living with you.
Living with you sans fear, O my sagacious husband, I wish to see the rivers, mountains, lakes and forests here and there.
I wish to enjoy the lotus lakes in full bloom, abounding in swans and ducks in the company of a brave husband like you.
Observing such vows and bathing daily in the lotus lakes, I shall be very much happy to sport with you, O largeeyed one
Thus living in your company for a thousand years or even  a hundred thousand years, I shall not feel the passing of time. I shall not desire even heaven.
O Raghava, tiger among men, if I were given heaven to live in without you, even that I shall not covet.
I shall go (along with you) to the highly impenetrable forest infested with animals like monkeys and elephants. I shall live in the forest in (full) discipline as in my father's abode, taking shelter at your feet.
Since I have no thought other than you and my heart is (irretrievably) attached to you I have resolved to die if separated from you. Pray, be favourably disposed to take me. I shall not be a burden to you.
Although Sita was thus appealing, Rama, devoted to righteousness, was (still) unwilling to take her. In order to dissuade her, he began to describe to the mournful Sita the many hardships of forest life.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyseventh sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Rama, who knew his duties and was devoted to righteousness, reflected on the difficulties of forest (life) and did not agree to take Sita even though she was pleading the way she did.
Righteous Rama consoled Sita whose eyes were blurred with tears, and in order to dissuade her (from going to the forest) said again:
Born in a noble race, O Sita, you are always devoted to duty. Follow your duty, here. It will make me happy.
Do as I tell you, O delicate Sita. There are, indeed, many hardships in the forest. I shall tell you all about them. Listen to me.
Give up the desire to live in the forest, O Sita Living in the dreary jungle, it is said, has many hardships.
I am saying all this in your interest. The forest is a haven of hardships. I know of no happiness in the forest.
It is frightening to hear the sounds of  waterfalls and the roar of lions living in the mountain caves. Therefore forest life is painful (fearful).
Big, wild animals, moving about freely and sporting in the deserted forest, attack on seeing a human. Thus forest is full of danger.
The rivers, infested with crocodiles and filled with mud are difficult to cross even for elephants in rut. Hence forest life is always extremely dangerous.
.The paths full of thorny creepers, echoing with the noise of wild fowls, and with no water (to drink) are difficult to tread. So forest is a source of suffering.
With the senses under control night and day, O Sita, one must be satisfied with the fruits fallen from trees. Therefore, forest life is full of suffering.
One has to wear robes of bark and matted hair and take to fasting as long as one can, O daughter of Mithila
One has to worship gods and ancestors according to tradition and extend hospitality to guests, (who arrive unexpectedly).
One has to wander about all the while (like an ascetic) as per the customs and take ablutions three times a day at prescribed hours. Hence life in the forest is extremely hard.
Flowers collected with one's own hands, O innocent one, should be offered on the altar as per injunction of the Vedas. Therefore (life in the) forest is difficult.
The wanderers in the jungle, O daughter of Mithila, have to be satisfied daily with whatever little food is available. So forest (life) is a hard life.
There is extreme wind and darkness, hunger and fear. Therefore forest (life) is difficult.
There are various forms of fierce reptiles fearlessly crawling on the ground. So (living in the) forest is extremely dangerous.
The serpents that live in and move like meandering rivers always obstruct  the paths. Therefore, living in the forest is tremendously difficult.
Birds, scorpions, insects, gnats and mosquitoes always create trouble. Therefore, life in the forest is all suffering.
O lovely Sita there are thorny trees with branches on the top interlaced with one another. There are kusa grass and reeds. So forest life is very hard.
There are various physical afflictions and fears for one who lives in the forest. Therefore, forest brings suffering.
Anger and greed have to be given up, with the mind preoccupied with ascetic practices. One should not be afraid of fearful situations. Hence forest (life) always very hard.
Thus forest life is not suitable for you. On reconsideration, I see that there are many dangers in forest life.
When the great Rama decided not to take her along with him to the forest, Sita, deeply grieved said these words.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टाविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyeighth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Having heard the words of Rama, thus spoke Sita in a faint voice in sadness, with tears flowing incessantly from her eyes:
Understand that the difficulties of forest life described by you will be turned into advantages if they are accompanied by your affection.
O scion of the Raghu race antelopes, lions, elephants, tigers, sarabhas, birds, srimaras and other wild beasts wandering in the forest have not seen your beauty before. Now on seeing you, they will flee away. In fact, who will not be afraid of seeing an object of fear?.
In accordance with the command of the elders, I must accompany you to the forest. If I am separated from you, I will give up my life here itself.
If I am  in your company, O Rama even the lord of the gods, Indra with all his might will not be able to hurt me.
Your salutary instruction to me, O Rama, is 'A woman cannot live without her husband'. This truth is greatly applicable to me.
O highly sagacious Rama  I had also heard in my father's house long ago, from brahmins prophesing that some day I shall have certainly to dwell in the forest.
O mighty hero ever since I heard the prophesies from the brahmin palmists I am yearning to dwell in the forest.
Therefore, O my beloved I must certainly obtain such a command to dwell in the forest. I must accompany you to the forest and it cannot be otherwise.
I will go with you, true to the prediction of the brahmin. That time has come and let his prediction come to pass.
I am aware, O valiant one, that there are hardships of every  kind in forest life. But they befall those whose senses are not under their  control.
When I was young in my father's house, a holy female mendicant foretold in the presence of my mother that I would dwell in the forest (in this life).
Pleased with my long entreaties in the past  to dwell with you in the forest, O lord, you had granted my desire.
Since then I have been counting time for this forest life. It pleases me to follow my valiant hero as he lives in the forest. Rama, prosperity to you
O my purehearted one by following my husband with love I shall become sinless, because my husband is my god.
My union with you, O highminded one, is auspicious even beyond death. A woman, given away by her parents in accordance with traditional offerings of water belongs to him even after death and lives with him. This is a statement from the Vedas quoted by famous brahmins.
Why don't you want to take to the forest your own wife who is loyal and devoted, and is of good conduct.
O Rama, I am faithful and devoted to you. I have equal disposition to happiness and sorrow. I equally share your prosperity and adversity. Therefore, you should  take your wife (to the forest). In this time of distress.
If you do not wish to take your wife in this time of distress to the forest I shall die by consuming poison or throwing myself into fire or drowning in water.
Despite Sita's  pleadings with him in various ways the mightyarmed Rama would not consent to take her to the desolate forest.
Thus spoken to (prevented), Sita was filled with grief and cried, drenching the ground with warm tears that fell from her eyes.
That selfpossessed scion of the Kakutstha dynasty consoled the copperredlipped Sita in several ways to dissuade her (from going to the forest).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyninth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
In response to Rama's consolation with regard to her stay in the forest, the daughter of Janaka, Maithili (Sita) said:
Sita agitated over a supreme cause upbraided the broadchested scion of the Raghu race out of love and injured selfrespect.
O Rama while accepting you as soninlaw did my father, king of Mithila and lord of Videha ever think that you are a woman in the guise of a man?
Alas that will be a falschood if people out of ignorance say that there is no supreme splendour in Rama like the shining Sun.
What may be the cause for your fear and depression behind your desire to desert one who is so exclusively devoted to you?
Know, O valiant one, that by remaining subordinate to you, I am as faithful to you as Savitri was to her husband, Satyavanta, son of Dyumatsena.
O sinless son of the Raghus I am not like other women who bring disgreace to the family. I have not looked at any one except you, even with my mind's eye. I will go (to the forest) along with you.
I have been living with you for a long time, O Rama I am young and chaste. Why do you, like an actor, wish to hand me over to others.
You, O sinless Rama, may become subservient and obedient to them about whose wellfare you are speaking of and on account of whom you are preventing me to go (along with you).
You should not depart for the forest without taking me. Be it for penance or for the forest or for heaven, I wish to be with you.
While following you, I will feel no fatigue there on the way as if I am going on a pleasurestroll or in a comfortable couch.
The white reeds, the kusha, the sara and the ishika grasses and thorny trees on the way will feel as soft as cotton or as the skin of a black antelope.
I shall regard, O charming Rama, the harmful dust raised by the stormy wind and settled on me as the most excellent sandal powder.
O rover of the forest I will feel happier when I sleep on the meadows (of tender green grass) on the outskirts of the forest than when I sleep on the couch spread with carpets.
Whatever leaves or roots or fruits you collect with your own hands for me little or much, they will be nectar to me.
Enjoying the seasonal flowers and fruits in the forest, I will not remember my mother or father or home.
Therefore, you should not anticipate any problem from me in the forest. Neither shall I be burdensome to you nor shall I make you experience any sorrow on my account.
Wherever I be with you is heaven and without, hell. O Rama, recognise this truth, and derive great pleasure in my company.
If you do not take me to the forest without the least hesitation I shall consume poison right now, but not live under the control of enemies (at Ayodhya).
If forsaken, O Lord I shall not live a life of sorrow. Instant death is better (than abandoned existence).
I cannot bear this grief even for a moment, what to speak of fourteen (ten and three and one) years of grieving.
Tormented with grief, Sita piteously and profusely lamented, and then exhausted,  embraced her husband  tightly and cried bitterly.
Pierced by so many words (of objection from  Rama), Sita felt like a cowelephant penetrated by poisonsmeared arrrows. And shed her longsuppressed tears like arani (a firekindling stick) kindling fire.
Crystallike tears arising out of distress flowed from her eyes like water trickling from two lotuses.
Her face with large eyes assumed the brightness of an immaculate Moon and withered with tears like a lotus plucked out of water.
With his arms Rama embraced Sita who had almost fainted in grief. And in order to create confidence in her he said these words:
When you are in grief O Devi I do not desire even heaven. Like the selfcreated Brahma, I have no fear for any one.
O Sita of auspicious countenance even though I am capable of protecting you I did not like your stay in the forest as I did not know your intentions.
Since you, O daughter of Mithila, were born to go along with me to the forest, I cannot abandon you just as a selfrespecting man cannot forsake his reputation.
O one  with (shapely) thighs like the trunk of an elephant follow only the path of righteousness practised earlier by the virtuous as Suvarchala follows the Sun.
Not that I shall not go to the forest (go I must). My father's word nourished by truth is leading me there, O daughter of Janaka
Obedience to parents is a righteous act. Therefore, O one with fair hips I cannot live and disobey the word of truth.
Mother, father and preceptor are present before us. By overstepping them, how can we, in various ways, worship God who is beyond reach (not visible)?
Where these three(mother,father and preceptor) equal to the three worlds are, O one with loverly sideglances, there is none in this world as holy. Therefore, they are to be worshipped.
Truth or munificence or homage or distribution of gifts to the revered ones or sacrifices, O Sita, are  not considered as efficacious as service to father.
By fulfilling father's wish, nothing is difficult to achieve, whether it is heaven, or wealth, or foodgrains, or learning, or sons or other comforts.
Great men who are devoted to the service of their parents attain the world of the gods, of gandharvas, of cows, of Visnu, of Brahma and other worlds.
My father who follows the path of truth and dharma whatever be his commands, I wish to obey. He is, indeed, dharma eternal.
O Sita, my discretion fails me in deciding whether to take you to Dandaka forest or not. You are, however, firmly determined to follow me, saying, you can live in the forest.
O one with fascinating eyes and exquisite beauty you were born to live in the forest. O gentle lady, assist me in carrying out my duties.
You, O my lovely beloved Sita, have taken in the right time a highly dignified decision befitting in all ways your family, myself and yourself.
O Sita, begin right now all preparations necessary for residing in the forest. O one, with beautiful buttocks, without you even the very heaven does not please me.
Give away your jewels to brahmins who need them and food to religious mendicants. Hurry up Do not delay.
Distribute among your attendants highly valuable ornaments and excellent clothing, charming articles meant for (court) sport, my couches, chariots and all other things. Offer the rest to brahmins.
Having come to know that her departure to the forest is acceptable to her husband, Sita, highly delighted, quickly got ready to give away (things).
Having heard her husband, the glorious and broadminded Sita was delighted with her desires fulfiled. She made preparations to gift away her wealth including jewels to the virtuous.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtieth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic  composed by sage Valmiki.
Lakshmana who had already reached there heard the conversation (between Sita and Rama). His eyes brimming with tears, he was unable to bear the grief. He held the feet of his brother tightly and said to the illustrious Sita and Rama of great resolve:
If you have decided to go to the forest where deer and elephants abound, I shall also accompany you by walking before you, holding the bow.
Accompanied by me, you will roam the forests echoing with the cries of birds and sounds of herds of animals.
Without you, I do not want victory over the gods or sovereignty over the worlds or even immortality.
When Rama tried to dissuade Lakshmana with many words of consolation Lakshmana who was determined to go to the forest said again:
You have granted permission to me earlier.Why are you now preventing me?
I wish to know, O sinless one, the reason why you are dissuading me, when I am willing to go with you. This creates a doubt in my mind.
Addressing the heroic Lakshmana in front of him imploring with folded hands to take him to the forest so that he may walk ahead (and guard them), the effulgent Rama said:
You are affectionate, you are devoted to dharma. You are valiant. You always walk the path of virtue. You are dear to me like my own life. You are not only an obedient brother but also a friend.
O Lakshmana, if you also accompany me to the forest, who will take care of mother Kausalya and the illustrious Sumitra?
Dasaratha, the mighty king like Parjanya (the raingod), lord of the earth used to shower favours on earth. But now he is bound by the noose of passion.
Once the daughter of king Aswapati (Kaikeyi) gains control over the kingdom, she will do nothing to help her afflicted cowives (Kausalya and Sumitra).
When Bharata secures the kingdom, his confidence reposed in Kaikeyi he will not bother about the miserable Kausalya and Sumitra.
Either by yourself or by seeking the favour of the king, O son of Sumitra, lend support to venerable  Kausalya. This is the objective you must accomplish.
If you do this, your devotion to me will be amply demonstrated. Service to the elders, O dutiful one, is a virtue, great and unequalled.
O delight of the Raghu race, do this for my sake, since deprived of us, there will be no happiness for our mother, O son of Sumitra
Thus addressed by Rama who was an adept in the use of words, eloquent Lakshmana gently replied:
Aware of your power O valiant one, Bharata will undoubtedly pay respect to Kausalya and Sumitra with all humility.
Noble Kausalya has under her charge a thousand villages for her sustenance. She can support a thousand men like me.
Illustrious Kausalya is competent enough to support herself, my mother and men  like me.
Make me your follower. There is no breach of virtue in this. I will have my purpose accomplished. Your object also will be fulfilled.
Holding the bow and arrows and carrying a crowbar and a basket, I shall go in front of you leading the way.
I shall daily collect roots, fruits and other forest products fit for ascetics.
When you go about for pleasure on mountain slopes along with Sita, I shall do everything for you, whether you are awake or asleep.
Pleased with his words Rama said, O Lakshmana go and take leave of all your friends.
O Lakshmana in the great sacrifice performed by the highsouled Janaka, Varuna himself gave him two aweinspiring celestial bows, two impenetrable divine armours, two quivers with inexhaustible arrows, two swords plated with gold and as bright as the sun. All these weapons are deposited in the house of our preceptor (sage Vasistha) where they are being worshipped. Go and bring them swiftly.
Lakshmana, who was resolved to go to the forest, took leave of his friends, and collected from the house of Vasistha, preceptor of the Ikshvaku race, the powerful weapons deposited with him.
Lakshmana, tiger among princes, brought all those divine weapons sanctified and  decorated with garlands and showed them to Rama.
O handsome Lakshmana, you have come at the expected time, said the selfpossessed Rama affectionately when he saw him arrive.
Let us give away, O tormentor of enemies (Lakshmana) my belogings to the ascetic brahmins.
Here live the best of brahmins who are deeply devoted to their teachers along with those who are dependent on me for their livelihood.
Fetch Suyajna, son of Vasistha, best among the brahmins along with all other distinguished brahmins to whom I will pay my homage and leave for the forest.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfirst sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Lakshmana having understood the very auspicious and welcome order (of Rama)  immediately  proceeded to the house of Suyajna.
Lakshmana paid homage to him who was in the firesanctuary, and said O friend, come and see the palace of Rama who is the accomplisher of all difficult tasks.
After performing the twilight prayers, Suyajna along with Lakshmana went straight away and entered the beautiful and prosperous palace of Rama.
On the arrival of sage Suyajna wellversed in the Vedas, both Rama and Sita offered obeisance to him as to firegod and circumambulated him.
Rama, scion of the Kakutstha dynasty, worshipped Suyajna with a collection of golden ornaments such as earrings, anklets, armlets, bracelets and many other ornaments of precious stones. Then urged by Sita, Rama said to him:
O handsome friend now Sita intends to give away to your wife her necklace, her golden chain and girdle. Could you accept them?
Sita is departing for the forest and offers your wife her armlets, wonderful and elegant  bracelets.
Sita also wishes to give away a couch with an exquisite cover, encrusted with a variety of precious stones.
I am gifting you, O best among brahmins a thousand elephants including Satrunjaya an elephant my maternal uncle had given me.
Thus addressed by Rama, Suyajna accepted the gifts and conferred auspicious blessings on Rama, Lakshmana and Sita.
Sweettongued Rama calmly said to his brother (Lakshmana) like Brahma addressing Indra:
O Lakshmana invite Agastya and Kausika, the two celebrated brahmins, and bestow on them with reverence plenty of precious gems like showers of rain on standing crops.
Satisfy them, O highlyarmed Lakshmana, O bestower of honour with a thousand cows, gold, silver and with the great wealth of gems.
O Lakshmana, give away chariots, maidservants, silk clothes to learned brahmins of Taittiriya branch and wellversed in the Vedas, to agreeable and faithful brahmins attending on Kausalya with their blessings till they are fully satisfied.
Noble counsellor (of our father) and charioteer Chitraratha has been in our service for many years. Gratify him with invaluable jewels, clothes, wealth, with young female calves and a thousand cows.
O Lakshmana many brahmacharis with a staff (as a mark of religious authority) wellversed in Katha and Kalapa portions of the Vedas engaged daily in the study of the Vedas and nothing else. Not active otherwise, they are fond of delicious food and are respected even by great people. Give them eighty carts filled with gems, a thousand bulls capable of carrying paddy, and two hundred oxen capable of  ploughing land and a thousand cows for preparing food (with milk products).
Give each of the large number of brahmacharis wearing girdles and working under Kausalya a thousand (cows or gold coins), O Lakshmana
You should, O Lakshmana treat all those brahmins in such a way that my mother shall be pleased on seeing my respectful offerings.
Thereupon Lakshmana, a tiger among men, personally distributed like Kubera, gifts of riches to all those Indras among brahmins (best of brahmins) in accordance with the instructions of Rama.
Rama then bestowed abundant wealth on each of the dependents as they stood with their throats choked with tears, saying:
Till I come back, guard each of the palaces of Lakshmana and mine and ensure that they are not left unattended.
Having spoken thus to all dependents who were overcome with grief, Rama ordered the  treasury officer to bring the entire treasure.
When all the dependents fetched the entire wealth of Rama, they were pleased to see the great heap of wealth.
Rama, best among men, got the entire wealth distributed among indigent brahmins, and young and old alike with the help of Lakshmana.
A brahmin by name, Trijata, a descendant of sage Garga and of reddishbrown colour used to live in that region earning his livelihood in the forest by digging the earth with an ironspade and a plough.
His young wife, highly distressed due to poverty, keeping her young sons before her said to the aged brahmin:
Listen to me throw away this ironspade. Go and see the righteous Rama.You may obtain something.
At the words of his wife, Trijata took the path to Rama's palace, having wrapped  himself with a torn upper garment .
No one in the crowd stopped Tirjata until he reached the fifth courtyard as he looked like Bhrigu and Angirasa in brilliance.
Trijata approached Rama and said O illustrious prince I am a destitute and have many children. I am  living in the forest by collecting leftover grains. Look at me.
Rama jokingly replied to him, I have not yet gifted one thousand cows. Throw your staff and the cows on the space your staff covers will be yours.
Bewildered Trijata swiftly tightened up his upper garment around his waist, set the direction for his staff and hurled it with all his might.
The staff he hurled crossed the bank of the river Sarayu and fell near a bull in the midst of a thousands cows.
The virtuous Rama embraced Trijata, and despatched all the cattle extending up to the bank of Sarayu to his hermitage.
Afterwards Rama sought to placate Trijata, that descendant of Ganga, saying: This was a joke. Do not be angry.
Your power is unsurpassable and to ascertain this, I incited you to do this act. If there is anything else, ask for it.
Truly speaking, there is no limit to seeking wealth. My wealth is specifically meant for brahmins. By distributing all the wealth earned by me, I get pleasure and renown.
Thereafter that great sage Trijata along with his wife, immensely happy to receive multitudes of cows, pronounced blessings on the magnanimous Rama for glory, power, pleasure and prosperity.
Prompted by the deserving words of acclaim from his friends, Rama distributed with joy and without delay the entire wealth earned by him through dharma.
After giving away plenty of wealth to brahmins in charity, Rama and Lakshmana along with Sita set out to see their father, king Dasaratha.
The pair of dazzling weapons held (by Rama and Lakshmana) looked splendid decorated with flower garlands by Sita.
The rich climbed their palaces and mansions, terraces of sevenstoried buildings and watched them sadly.
The streets were so thronged with multitudes of citizens that they were impassable. Therefore, people felt miserable and ascended their mansions and gazed at Rama.
Seeing Rama walking without the royal umbrella, people were very much shocked. They expressed their reaction in so many words:
Whenever Rama went out, powerful army of four divisions used to follow him. Today he is walking alone followed by Lakshmana and Sita.
Rama who enjoyed the comforts of affluence gratifies those who have desires. Out of veneration for righteousness, he does not want to prove his father false (to his promise).
It was not possible even for the creatures wandering in the sky (birds) to have a glimpse of Sita before. Now passersby walking the highway can behold her.
Sita who used to apply fragrant unguents and smear the body with redsandal cream will now be exposed to the rain, the heat and the cold which will quickly discolour her body.
Surely king Dasaratha possessed of an evil spirit spoke the way he did today. Otherwise, should a king banish his beloved son?
Even a son who is bereft of virtues cannot be banished, what to say about Rama, who by good conduct alone has conquered the world.
Harmlessness, compassion, learning, good conduct, restraint of senses and selfcontrol, all these six qualities adorn Rama, the greatest among men.
Therefore, people are deeply pained to see Rama afflicted. They look like aquatic creatures in summer when the water dries up.
Just as severed at the root, an entire tree along with its fruits and flowers is destroyed, similarly the whole world gets afflicted when Rama, the ruler of the world, comes to harm.
Effulgent Rama personifies the essence of dharma. He is the root of  (the tree of) humanity. The other people are connected with this tree like flowers, fruit, leaves and branches.
Let all of us without delay along with our wives and relations follow Rama, like Lakshmana, wherever he goes.
Deserting our gardens, fields and houses and experiencing the same joy and sorrow of the virtuous Rama, we shall follow him.
Let Kaikeyi take possession of our deserted and dilapidated homes with ruined courtyards which seem as though struck by calamities. They are drained of wealth and foodgrains, covered with dust and abandoned by the gods. There is no water or smoke (from kitchen). They are infested with rats. They stand unswept. There foodgrains lie around ratholes, and broken earthenwares lie scattered. There are no offerings, no sacrifices, no recitation of sacred hymns, no libations and no invocations.
Since the scion of the Raghu race is going to the forest, let that forest itself be our city and let the city deserted by us become the forest.
Let all the fanged creatures leave their lairs, birds and animals the mountain slopes, lions and elephants, their haunts due to the fear caused by our presence and occupy the city left by us (on seeing us deserting).
Let Kaikeyi along with her son and her relatives acquire that country which will be inhabited by birds and animals living on grass, fruits, and flesh. Withdrawn, we shall happily live in the forest along with Rama.
Such were the various words uttered by the people. Even after hearing them his (Rama's) mind remained unmoved (from his resolve).
Dutiful Rama, endowed with the prowess of an intoxicated elephant, approached the residence of his father that resembled from a distance the peak of mount Kailasa in splendour.
Rama entered the royal palace guarded by welltrained warriors and not from very far saw Sumantra who stood a picture of dejection.
Even after observing the people in grief, Rama did not reveal his sorrowful feelings. Bound by duty he went in as if with a smile to see his father.
Seeing Sumantra stricken with grief for the first time the magnanimous Rama, scion of the Ikshvaku dynasty, on the way to the forest waited there for his father to be informed of his arrival.
Rama, lover of righteousness, determined to go to the forest in obedience to his father's command said to Sumantra, Inform the king of my arrival.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रयस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtythird sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic  composed by sage Valmiki.
Let my father be informed of my arrival, said the lotuseyed, darkcomplexioned, venerable, peerless Rama to the charioteer.
At the command of Rama, charioteer Sumantra whose senses were overwhelmed with grief quickly entered the apartment of the king and found him heaving sighs.
He saw the lord of the world (Dasaratha) dull like the Sun in eclipse, like the fire covered with ashes, like a tank with its water dried up.
Seeing the king brooding over Rama, in an extremely agitated state, the sagacious charioteer approached him with folded hands.
At first greeting the king with the words 'victory be yours', the charioteer, trembling with fear, gently said in a feeble voice.
Your son Rama, the  best of men, having given away his entire wealth in charity to brahmins and to all the dependents is waiting at the entrance.
O Lord of the world behold him embellished with all princely virtues like the Sun encircled with its rays, (now) leaving for the forest.
That truthful and virtuous king (Dasaratha) who was deep like the ocean and free from mud (pure) like the  sky replied:
O Sumantra bring all my consorts who are here. In the company of all my wives, I desire to give audience to virtuous Rama.
O venerable ones, king Dasaratha summons you. Go there without delay, said Sumantra to the king's consorts after crossing the inner apartment.
Thus addressed by Sumantra in accordance with the king's order, all the women went to their husband's palace.
Thereafter, Kausalya surrounded by three hundred and fifty  ladies who were faithful to their vows, reached there slowly with their eyes turned copperred (in grief).
Usher in my son (Rama), O Sumantra, said the lord of the world (king Dasaratha) to the charioteer on seeing his wives arrive.
Then the charioteer fetched Rama, Lakshmana and Sita and advanced towards the king without delay.
When the king saw from a distance his son coming with folded hands, he, surrounded by the ladies and tormented with grief, stood up.
At the sight of Rama, the lord of men (king Dasaratha), tortured with grief, immediately ran towards him but  before he could reach him, fell unconscious on the floor.
Rama and the mighty warrior Lakshmana, quickly reached the king who lay as though  he had lost his senses due to grief.
All on a sudden there arose from (the mouths of) a thousand women of the palace cries of 'alas, alas, Rama' mingled with the tinkling sounds of their ornaments.
Thereafter Rama and Lakshmana assisted by Sita, lifted him wailing in their arms and laid him on a couch.
After the king regained his consciousness in a moment, Rama with folded hands said to him, who was immersed in a sea of sorrow:
O great king, I am asking leave of you, for you are lord of  all of us. I am set to depart  for the Dandaka forest. See me (off) in a cheerful mood.
Allow Lakshmana and Sita to follow me into the forest. I tried to dissuade them with a number of reasons but they did not agree.
Discard your grief and, like Brahma, the creator, allow Lakshmana, Sita and me all of us, your subjects, O respector of men
On seeing Rama, unruffled, waiting for his permission to proceed to the forest, the lord of the earth, king Dasaratha said:
I have been deluded by Kaikeyi into bestowing boons. Imprison me and be now king of Ayodhya, O scion of the Raghu dynasty
Thus spoken to by the king, Rama, skilled in speech and upholder of righteousness, replied to his father with folded palms:
You will remain the lord of this earth for a thousand years to come, O king As for me, I will dwell in the forest. Do not deviate from truth on my account.
Having fulfilled the vow on the completion of fourteen years of wandering in the forest I shall come back to touch your feet, O lord of men
The king who was bound by the cord of truth and instigated by Kaikeyi said, wailing in distress:
Go, my dear child, wish you wellMay your path be auspicious, free from obstacles and fear (from any quarters). Come back (after fulfilment of the pledge)
O my beloved son O delight of the Raghus you are devoted to truth and duty. It is difficult to dissuade you from your resolve .
O son, by all means, do not go now, today, tonight Give me, at least, one day more to see (by with) you to my satisfaction.
Stay tonight in the company of your mother and me. With all our desire satisfied, you can set out tomorrow at the appropriate time.
O my son, O descendant of the Raghus, you are called upon to accomplish, by all means, a very difficult task. For the sake of my pleasure you are forsaking your dear ones and going to the desolate forest.
I swear by truth, O my beloved son, that your departure to the forest is in no way a pleasure to me. With a hidden motive, this woman who is like fire  concealed by ashes has duped me.
Instigated by this Kaikeyi, the destroyer of traditions (of the race) I have been deceived for which you wish to pay.
It is not a great surprise that you, O my son, being the eldest, want to make your father free from a false promise.
Rama and Lakshmana were sad to hear the words of their anguished father. Rama replies:
Who will give me the merit (of propriety) I earn today? Therefore, I want to depart (today), discarding all my desires.
The kingdom abdicated by me with all its people, its wealth and foodgrains may be bestowed on Bharata.
My decision to go to the forest remains unchanged. O bestower of boons, O king  honour to the last word the boons you had granted Kaikeyi. And adhere to truth.
As already said, I shall dwell in the forest for fourteen years with forest rangers, in obedience to your commands.
Do not brood. Bestow the kingdom on Bharata. I do not have any desire for the kingdom or pleasure. Nothing is dearer to me than compliance with your order, O Delight of the Raghu race
Let your grief go. Do not shed tears. The indomitable ocean, Lord of rivers, is never perturbed.
I desire no kingdom, no comfort, not this earth nor any pleasure nor heaven nor even life.
I wish you, O best of men, to uphold truth and not falsehood. I swear this in your presence in the name of truth and on my merits acquired.
It is not possible for me, O father to stay here for a moment any longer. Restrain your grief. There can be no change in my resolve, O king
'O Rama, go to the forest', Kaikeyi had said, and I have given her word I would go. I must fulfil my promise.
Do not worry, O Lord We will enjoy (our stay in) the peaceful forest full of deer and resounding with the chirpings of various birds.
Father is divine even for the gods as cited in scriptures, therefore, looking upon father as my god, I will carry out his words, O father
I shall return after fourteen years have passed, O best among men you will see me back, Give up this grief.
When you, O tiger among men, are required (as king) to pacify those whose throats are choked with tears, why this change in you?
I am renouncing this city, kingdom and this entire earth, and let all this be conferred on Bharata. In obedience to your order, I shall go and live in the forest for a long time.
I am leaving behind, O king this (auspicious) land with its welllaid boundaries, mountain ranges, cities and forests, which Bharata alone should rule. Let it happen the way you have said.
O king my mind derives no happiness from great enjoyment or personal comfort as it does from carrying out your order. This is corroborated by the wise. Your grief (relating to filfilment of the vow) on mt account will be dispelled, O sinless one
O sinless one by associating you with falsehood I will neither seek this eternal kingdom nor objects of desires nor objects of happiness nor Maithili nor even my life. I only wish that your vow comes true.
Entering the forest full of various kinds of trees I shall be happy to view the mountains, rivers and the lakes and to eat fruits and roots. (Hence) do not grieve.
The king, immersed in anguish and distressed with tears of grief embraced his son and then fell down unconscious on the floor and lay motionless.
Thereupon all the queens except Kaikeyi, wailed loudly. Sumantra, too, cried and fell unconscious. The entire palace cried 'Alas, Alas'.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfourth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the  holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Overcome with anger, charioteer Sumantra started shaking his head and sighing off and on, crushing his palms and grinding his teeth. His eyes turned red due to anger. Overcome with a sudden, ominous grief, the complexion of his face turned red.  Sumantra understood the mind of Dasaratha. With sharp arrows of words as if piercing the heart of Kaikeyi, he denounced her in exceptionally harsh words which, like thunderbolt, cut her to the quick:
O Kaikeyi  you have forsaken king Dasaratha, your husband and the lord of this entire world consisting of the movable and the immovable immovable and movable world. There is nothing in this world which you are notcapable of doing.
King Dasaratha is invincible like Indra, unshakeable like a mountain and unperturbable like the ocean. By causing grief to him through your action I feel you are killing your husband (inch by inch). I think you are ultimately destroying your own race.
Do not have contempt for Dasaratha who is your husband, nourisher and bestower of boons. For a wife, the desire of her husband is considered worthier than ten million sons.
After the death of the king, the princes will obtain the kingdom according to   seniority. Why do you want to break this tradition in the case of Rama, the lord of the Ikshvaku dynasty?
Let your son Bharata be king and rule the earth. All of us will go whereever Rama goes.
Now by  your act, you intend to transgress the bounds of tradition(code of conduct). No brahmin shall ever dwell in your country.
All of us certainly will follow the path pursued by Rama. Abandoned by relatives, brahmins and virtuous men for all times, what pleasure will you derive by your lust for this kingdom? O Kaikeyi, why do you intend to trangress the limits of honour?
It is a wonder that while bent upon banishing Rama, you are  not destroyed by frightening fire created by great brahmarsis, crying, 'Shame, shame'
By axing a mango tree and growing a nimba in its place and sprinkling it with milk one does not get sweet fruit.
Your nature corresponds to your mother's, so I think. 'Honey will not flow from a nimba tree' is a wellknown saying in this world.
We have heard in the past about the evil (stubborn) nature of your mother. Once a bestower of boons conferred an extraordinary boon on your father by virtue of which he could tell the sounds of all living beings. He also understood the language of all crookedly  moving creatures.
Then one day near his bed your highly brilliant father laughed repeatedly over what an ant or a bird said, for he knew the meaning from its sound.
This incensed your mother who seeking the noose of death, asked him, 'O handsome king, I intend to know the cause of your laughter'.
'O queen if I disclose it, then I will undoubtedly die that very movement' replied the king to his wife.
Then your mother said to your father, 'Whether you live or die, tell me the cause. You are laughing at me'.
Hearing the words of his beloved, king of Kekaya related the entire matter, as it happened, concerning the conferor of boons.
That holy man who had granted the boon (to the king) had said, 'Let her die or destroy herself, but do not disclose (the cause of your laughter).
Happy to hear these words, your father sent away your mother and moved about like Kubera.
O evilminded one you, too, are following the path of wickedness, forcing the king infatuated (with you) to act unrighteously.
The generally accepted saying in this world that 'sons resemble the father and, daughters the mother' appears true to me today.
Do not be like your mother. Accept what the king says. Abide by his wishes. Be his saviour.
Instigated by the wicked, do not attribute unrighteousness to your husband who is equal to Indra in brilliance and is the sustainer of this world.
The lotuseyed, sinless and prosperous king Dasaratha, O Devi will not render false the promise given you (he will fulfil it in another form).
Let his eldest son Rama, valiant, generous, skilful, dutiful and protector of this world, be consecrated.
O Devi, if Rama goes to the forest leaving his father, the king, you will be squarely blamed by the people of the world.
Therefore, let Rama potect this kingdom. Be relieved of mental afflictions. There is no other person in this excellent city more competent than Rama to rule this kingdom.
If Rama is installed as heirapparent, king Dasaratha, the great archer will retire to the forest for carrying out austerities following ancient customs.
Afflicted on account of the promise he had made, Dasaratha, descendant of the Ikshvakus heaved deep sighs again and again and with his eyes full of tears uttered these words to Sumantra:
O Sumantra arrange immediately four divisions of the army, wellequipped with  precious stones to escort Rama in his journey to (the forest).
Let the sweettongued courtesans, opulent merchants with well spreadout merchandise make the army of my son graceful.
Main weapons, citizens (bodyguards), carts, wanderers in the forest and fowlers wellacquainted with the forest shall follow Rama.
Hunting the elephants and antelopes, drinking forest honey, beholding several rivers on the way, Rama will not recollect the kingdom.
Let the entire contents of my granary and treasury follow Rama wherever he lives in the desolate forest.
Performing sacrifices in the holy places and liberally giving appropriate gifts, Rama will live happily in the forest in the company of sages.
(While) mightyarmed Bharata will rule Ayodhya, Rama be furnished with all objects of enjoyment.
While Dasaratha was saying these words, Kaikeyi was gripped by fear and her face looked pale. Even her voice got choked.
The dejected and frightened Kaikeyi with a dry countenance, looked at the king and said:
O virtuous king Bharata will not take charge of the kingdom abandoned by men, drained of wealth and incapable of being enjoyed, like wine with its essence evaporated.
King Dasaratha heard the terribly cruel and shameless words of that largeeyed Kaikeyi, and said:
O brutal Kaikeyi, you fastened me to the yoke and when I am drawing forward, why do you beat me? O vile woman why did  you not prevent me in the beginning itself?
At these wrathful words of Dasaratha, Kaikeyi with redoubled fury replied to the king:
In your own dynasty  king Sagara prevented his wellknown eldest son Asamanjasa (from enjoying the kingdom). Rama also should depart in the same manner.
Hearing the words of Kaikeyi, Dasaratha could say only 'shame'. All the people felt ashamed, but Kaikeyi could not understand this.
That wickedminded Asamanjasa used to seize the children playing on the street and amuse himself by hurling them in the waters of river Sarayu.
Watching it, all the enraged citizens said to the king, 'O enhancer of the prosperity of the kingdom, either you choose Asamanjasa or us'.
The king  then asked them, 'Why this fear?'. And the citizens responded:
That insane (Asamanjasa) while throwing our children who were playing around into Sarayu river in his insanity derived incomparable pleasure'.
That king (Sagara) heard the words of the citizens and with the intention of doing good to them, banished that malevolent son.
Then the father made him and his wife climb a carriage with the clothes they had at the time on them and at once ordered his servants to banish him for life.
Like an evildoer wandering about in different directions, holding a spade and a basket in his hand, he went about digging the impenetrable mountains.
Highly righteous king Sagara thus banished his son. What sin has Rama committed to secure a similar banishment?
We see no fault in Rama. Unlike the stain in the Moon it is difficult to find any  blemish in him.
O Kaikeyi speak truly if you find any fault in this scion of the Raghu race (Rama). Then he will be exiled.
The act of banishment of an innocent one walking the righteous path is like destroying the brilliance of Indra by restraining his righteousness.
O Devi, there is no use obstructing Rama's prosperity. O one with an auspicious countenance, save yourself from the censure of the world.
Having heard Siddhartha, the king, stricken with grief, said to Kaikeyi in a gradually feeble voice.
O Kaikeyi of vicious behaviour, you do not aceept even the words of Siddhartha. You woman of wicked acts, having adopted vile ways, and abjured the right path cannot know what is good either for you or for me.
Abandoning this kingdom, these comforts and this wealth, I shall follow Rama. Enjoy the kingdom for a long time happily along with king Bharata.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षट्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends  the thirtysixth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
On hearing the minister, Rama who knew how to be polite spoke these words  to Dasaratha humbly:
O king giving up pleasures and attachments altogether I am going to live on whatever is available in the forest. What is the use of followers?
Having given away the best of elephants, will any one be interested in the rope tied to its girth? Why should one have any attachment for the rope after he has given up the elephant?
O best among the virtuous O lord of the world, I do not have any use for this army. I am giving away everything (to Bharata). Bring the bark only.
I am going to the forest to live there for fourteen years. Bring me two things: a basket and a crowbar.
Thereupon in the assembly of people, without any sense of shame Kaikeyi herself brought the bark robes and said to the son of the Raghus (Rama), Wear it.
The tiger among men (Rama) received the bark robes from Kaikeyi and putting off the fine apparel wore the robes of an ascetic.
Lakshmana also  removed his auspicious raiment in front (presence) of his father and accepted (put on) the robes of an ascetic.
Then Sita in silk clothes glanced at the bark robes meant for her to wear and was frightened like a doe seeing a (fowler's) snare.
Sita of auspicious nature who knew her duties and understood righteousness, took the garments made of kusa grass from Kaikeyi. With a sense of abashment her eyes suffused with tears, she said to her husband who was the very image of  the king of gandharvas.
Sita, unacquainted with wearing bark robes, asked Rama, perplexed 'How do the sages who live in the forest wear bark garment?'.
The daughter of Janaka, placed one end of the garment round her neck and held the other in her hand, and stood ashamed as she did not know what to do next.
Rama, foremost among protectors of righteousness, came forward quickly and fastened the bark himself over her silk garment.
Beholding Rama fastening the bark garment on Sita, the women of the inner apartment shed tears from their eyes.
Profoundly distressed, they said to Rama glowing with burning lustre O dear, no one has ordered this highminded Sita to dwell in the forest.
In obedience to the words of your father, O lord you are going to the forest. Till you return, please allow us to have her (Sita's) audience.
Go, O son to the forest with Lakshmana as your companion. (But) this auspicious Sita, will not be able to live in the jungle like a hermit.
Do accede to our prayer. Let lovely Sita stay with us as you, O son faithful to your duty, will not like to remain here.
While Rama was listening to such words uttered by them, he got the bark robes fastened round Sita who was of similar nature.
When Sita wore the bark garments, Vasistha, the king's preceptor who was watching this restrained her (Sita) and said to Kaikeyi:
.You are exceeding all limits of decency O Kaikeyi your motive is evil. You are a disgrace to the race You have deceived the king and your behaviour does not conform to the standards (of righteousness).
You are devoid of good conduct, O Kaikeyi Divine Sita need not go to the forest. Remaining here she should occupy the royal throne of Rama.
For every householder, his wife is the soul. Since Sita is the soul of Rama, she can rule this earth.
The guardians of the harem, its patron king Dasaratha with his retinue and, the people of this city will go wherever Rama lives with his wife.
Wandering in the forest and wearing bark, Satrughna and Bharata will live in the company of their elder brother (Rama) in the jungle.
Intent upon doing harm to the people with your vile behaviour, you alone rule this kingdom full of trees and deserted by men.
That is not a kingdom where Rama does not rule. If Rama lives in the forest, that shall be  the kingdom.
If Bharata is truly born to the king, he will not rule the kingdom which has not been bestowed on him (wholeheartedly) by his father. Nor will he live like a son to you.
Even if you were to fly from earth to sky, Bharata who knows the traditions of his  father's dynasty, will not act otherwise.
Therefore, by greedily guarding your son's interest you are doing him harm. There is  none in this world who will not follow Rama.
Today  you shall see, O Kaikeyi, flocks of cattle, elephants, deer and birds following Rama, even the trees bending towards him.
O Kaikeyi remove those bark robes and bestow on your daughterinlaw precious ornaments. She was not ordained to wear the bark. Vaisishta, saying so, prevented Sita from wearing that garment.
O Kaikeyi, you asked that Rama only should dwell in the forest (wearing bark robes). Therefore let Sita, adorn her body daily, while she  lives in the forest with Rama.
Equipped with excellent chariots, attendants, garments, and all other needs let the princess (Sita) go. While seeking boons, you did not include Sita.
(Though) Vasistha, endowed with matchless power, the preceptor of the king and foremost among the brahmins thus expressed himself, Sita was not willing to swerve from her resolve in order to serve her beloved husband.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyseventh sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Beholding Sita who was wearing a bark garment, like one without a support, though having a husband, all the people cried bitterly exclaiming O Dasaratha, fie on you.
Hearing that tumult the distressed Dasaratha lost faith in his own life and in his righteousness.
The descendant of the Ikshvakus (Dasaratha), heaving hot sighs, said to his wife O Kaikeyi, Sita does not deserve to go (to the forest) in garment of kusa grass.
Sita a delicate, young princess accustomed to comforts is not fit to dwell in the forest. This is what my preceptor has truly spoken.
Sita, daughter of Janaka, the greatest among kings, stands amidst people wearing bark garment like an ascetic with her senses switched off. To whom and what harm has she done?
Let the daughter of Janaka take off her bark garments. This is not the promise I had made to you earlier. Let the princess happily go to the forest adorned with all jewels and with all other necessities.
By giving this cruel promise through importunity, I have rendered myself unfit to live. This promise was made as a child's play and it (now) destroys me like a bamboo destroyed by its own flowers.
O sinful woman O wretch Rama might have done something unbecoming to you, but what offence has Sita committed?
What wrong has the daughter of Janaka largeeyed like a doe, so gentle and worthy of compassion done to you?
Rama's exile, O wicked woman, is enough for you. What are you committing further heinous crimes for?
I have heard you, O Devi speaking to Rama when he came here in connection with the coronation. I promised you to that extent only.
Having exceeded all that, you want to behold Sita in bark garment and thereby, wish for hell.
The king could not see any end to his lamentation. Immersed in the grief of separation from his son and deeply tormented, he fell down on the ground.
Rama who was about to leave for the forest addressed his father who sat with his head bent once again:
O righteous father O king my aged and illustrious mother, Kausalya possesses neither a mean character nor does she blame you.
O bestower of boons,  separated from me and unaccustomed to suffering, she will be plunged into an unforeseen ocean of sorrow. You should pay her greater attention.
Let her not grieve on account of her son. O venerable father, if she, who deserves compassion is honoured by you, she will live.
You are powerful like Indra.You should act accordingly so that my mother who has a possesive feeling towards her son should not, due to emaciation go to the abode of Yama after my departure for the forest. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyeighth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
After hearing  Rama and beholding him in the robes of  an ascetic, Dasaratha and his wives fell unconscious. With his body and mind afflicted with grief, Dasaratha could not look Rama in the face nor could he make a reply.
The mightyarmed king lost consciousness for a moment and in grief lamented, brooding only over Rama.
'In the past I must have separated many from their children or harmed many living beings. That is why I think this calamity has befallen me.
Unless the destined hour arrives, life does not leave the body. Therefore, even though I am tormented by Kaikeyi and even after seeing my son, standing before me, (bright) like fire, taking off his fine clothes and wearing the robes of an ascetic my end does not come.
Only because of Kaikeyi  who resorted to this deception in pursuit of selfish ends so many people are made to suffer.
Having uttered these words and muttering, 'O Rama' only once, his vision blurred by tears, he could speak no more.
Regaining his senses in a moment, the king, with eyes filled with tears, said to Sumantra:
Harness the finest horses to the chariot suitable for the journey, drive this magnanimous Rama to a place outside the city, and come back.
That the pious and heroic son is banished by his parents to the forest is, I think, the reward to the virtuous for his virtues.
In obedience to the words of the king, Sumantra promptly harnessed the horses to a welldecorated chariot and brought it there.
With folded palms Sumantra informed the prince that a chariot, decked in gold and harnessed with excellent horses, is ready.
The king who was aware of the right place and time summoned hurriedly the treaury officer, who was firm and honest and said to him:
Assess the (needs for) number of years the princess of Videha (Sita) is going to be in the forest, and fetch her quickly highly valuable garments and excellent ornaments.
Ordered thus by the king, the officer went to the treasury, collected all the things and presented them to Sita.
That princess of noble birth from Videha adorned her beautiful limbs with the sparkling ornaments and got ready to depart for the forest.
Welladorned Sita illumined the palace like the rising Sun lighting up the sky at dawn.
Kausalya, Sita's motherinlaw, took her in her arms, embraced her, kissed her on the forehead, and said to her who conducted herself without evoking any pity.
Those women who, although always gratified, do not follow their husband when they fall into misfortune, are regarded as unfaithful.
Though they have enjoyed all pleasures (with their husbands) earlier, they censure them in the wake of the slightest trouble or even abandon them. This is the nature of women.
Evilminded young ladies are infidels. They are of perverted nature. They are inscrutable. In an instant they lose their love (for their husbands).
Neither family traditions nor benefits received, nor education nor affection nor gifts nor even accumulated wealth attract women's hearts. Their minds are unstable indeed.
But for those virtuous women whose minds are fixed in chastity, truth, scriptures and stability, the husband occupies a distinguished place and is considered supremely holy.
You must not underestimate my son in his exile. You must treat him as your god whether he is wealthy or not.
Sita who understood the import of these words which were in conformity with dharma and artha, repiled to her motherinlaw facing her with folded palms:
I shall do exactly all that the venerable motherinlaw instructs me. I have heard it earlier and have fully understood as to how I should conduct myself towards my husband.
My worshipful motherinlaw should not equate me with wicked people (women). I cannot swerve from the path of virtue like radiance which never leaves the Moon.
A veena (lute) sans strings cannot be played. A chariot without wheels cannot move. Similarly, a woman without her husband finds no  happiness even though she has one hundred sons.
While the happiness that the father, mother and son give is limited, a husband gives unlimited happiness. Which wife will not worship such a husband?
Instructed about my obligations by an eminent lady (her mother?), imbued with these ideals, how can I, O exalted one, underestimate him (my husband)? For a woman the husband is a god indeed
Listening to the heartstirring words of Sita, Kausalya with her heart so pure burst instantaneously into tears of joy and grief.
Most virtuous Rama approached his mother, that highly revered lady among all his mothers, and with folded hands said:
O mother, do not grieve. Look after my father. My stay in the forest will soon come to an end.
Fourteen years will pass off like a night's sleep. You will see me come home safe and sound, surrounded by my friends.
Speaking thus to his mother with highly polished words, he then turned his gaze at his other three hundred and fifty mothers.
To all the mothers who stood deeply distressed with grief the son of Dasaratha spoke with folded hands these words suffused with virtue:
If I have been harsh towards you, on account of our living together or through ignorance may you forgive me. I (now) seek leave of you all.
All the women with their senses afflicted by grief heard the virtuous and wellbalanced words of the scion of the Raghu race:
While Rama said so, there arose a loud cry of the wives of the king like the cry of the female herons.
Dasaratha's palace which reverberated, like the rumblings of the cloud, with the sounds of drums and other musical instruments earlier, now immensely griefsticken and trapped in calamity, is filled with wailings and lamentations. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyninth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Thereafter, Sita, Rama and Lakshmana with folded palms in a forlom state touched (the feet of) the king and circumambulated him.
Taking leave of Dasaratha, the righteous descendant of the Raghus (Rama) along with Sita paid obeisance to his mother Kausalya who was afflicted with deep grief.
Immediately following Rama, his brother, Lakshmana also paid obeisance to Kausalya and, thereafter, held the feet of his own mother Sumitra.
While the mightyarmed Lakshmana paid her homage, Sumitra wailed, kissed him on his forehead, wished him well and said:
Although deeply attached to your beloved ones, O Son, you are born to dwell in the forest. Never be inattentive towards your brother Rama who is on his way (to the forest).
Rama is your refuge in times of adversity or prosperity, O sinless one To be obedient to the eldest (brother) is the duty of virtuous men in this world.
Charity, initiation at sacrifices and yielding life in battles are the befitting ancient traditions prevailing in your race.
Having said this to Lakshmana Sumitra again and again said to her beloved Rama, who was fully prepared, 'Go, go'.
(To Lakshmana she said) Regard Rama as Dasaratha, Sita as me and the forest as Ayodhya. My child, go in peace.
Then Sumantra who knows the ways of politeness and humility spoke to Rama, with folded hands as Matali did to Indra.
O Illustrious prince, wish you well Mount the chariot. I shall convey you speedily whereever you want.
You have been directed by Kaikeyi to live in the forest for fourteen years. Accordingly you must now commence counting those years as directed.
Sita of lovely limbs decorated herself and with a cheerful mind boarded the chariot which was shining like the Sun.
Thereafter, Rama and Lakshmana also boarded that chariot decorated with gold and  shining like blazing fire.
Fatherinlaw (Dasaratha) gave clothes and ornaments on the assessment of the number of years Sita was going to spend in the forest with her husband.
So also Dasaratha secured a multitude of weapons, shields and protective leathercoverings for hands and placed them at the centre of the chariot, for use by the brothers. When Sumantra ensured that Sita, Rama and Lakshmana boarded the chariot,  he briskly hastened the horses which were as speedy as the wind.
Having seen Rama set out  for the great forest for a long period, the city was stilled and men were enervated.
The city was distressed and flurried by the intoxicated elephants, provoked by the mighty sound of the tinkling of bells and the neighing of the horses.
Thereafter the extremely afflicted people of the city, including young and old alike, ran towards Rama like men oppressed with heat running for water.
All the people hanging from the chariot from behind and by the sides, heaving deeply, their faces covered with tears, thus addressed to Sumantra:
O charioteer, control the reins of the horses and go slow so that we may look at the face of Rama, for soon we will not be able to see him.
Alas, the heart of Kausalya whose son, Rama, resembles the offspring of the gods, does not break even though he is going to the forest Undoubtedly it must be made of iron.
Sita, deeply attached to her duty, and with her desire fulfilled is following her husband like a shadow just as the sunlight which never leaves mount Meru.
With your desires fulfilled, O Lakshmana, you will attend to your godlike brother who always speaks pleasant words.
The very fact that you are  following Rama is a great achievement and a great fortune for you. This, in fact, is the way to heaven.
Speaking thus, the people following their beloved Rama, the delight of the Ikshvaku dynasty, were not able to bear (restrain) the tears flowing from their eyes.
I wish to see my beloved son said the king with a sense of desolation and emerged, surrounded by forlorn women, from the palace.
He heard the women crying loudly in front like wailings of cowelephants when their bull elephant is captured.
The king born in the race of Kakutstha, though bright, looked dull then like the full Moon eclipsed (by Rahu).
The son of Dasaratha, glorious Rama of inconceivable courage, exhorted the charioteer to drive the chariot fast.
Urged by Rama to drive fast on the one hand and by the citizens to stay, on the other, the charioteer could do neither on the way.
As the mightyarmed Rama was going away, the dust raised from the earth subsided with the tears falling from the citizens' (eyes).
At the time of Rama's departure, the insensate city was drenched with tears of the deeply afflicted people crying, 'Alas, Alas'.
Tears born of anguish fell from the eyes of women just as waterdrops fall from lotuses shaken by the movements of fishes.
Having seen the city (people) absorbed in one single thought, the prosperous king, griefstricken, fell down on the ground like a tree severed at its root.
When the people saw the king enfeebled by deep grief, they raised an uproar behind Rama's (chariot).
Some among them wailed 'Oh Rama', while some others cried 'Oh mother of Rama' By crying loudly, they made the women in the inner apartment cry too.
When Rama glanced back, he saw his mother and father trailing behind him on the highway, with an agitated and dejected mind.
Like a fastened foal cannot see its mother, Rama restrained by bonds of duty could not see his parents clearly.
Seeing his parents, who were worthy of riding a chariot now going on foot, who were accustomed to comforts and did not deserve any suffering, Rama urged his charioteer to drive fast.
Rama the best among men, could not, like an elephant tormented by the goad, endure that pitiful sight of his father and mother.
Rama's mother ran after the chariot, like an affectionate cow running towards the shed to join its fastened calf.
While Kausalya was weeping and running after the chariot, crying O 'Rama, O Sita, O Lakshmana, shedding tears for them, Rama repeatedly glanced at her who was twisting and bending as if in a dancing pose.
The king cried, 'Stay, Stay', while Rama said 'Go on, Go on'. Sumantra's mind was caught as if in between two wheels.
When the king reproaches you for not stopping the chariot, you can say 'I could not hear'.Prolonging agony is sinful, said Rama to Sumantra.
Obeying the command of Rama and after taking leave of the people, Sumantra hastened the horses although they were galloping.
The king's men returned, with Rama circumambulated (on the plane of their minds). But from their minds they could not hold back their tears (grief).
We should not follow over a long distance those we wish to return, said the ministers to king Dasaratha.
Dasaratha and his wives, overcome with grief, heard their words steeped in virtue (wisdom). The king stood there with his perspiring body and melancholic appearance, fixing his gaze on his son.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortieth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic  composed by sage Valmiki.
When Rama, the foremost men, was departing with folded palms there arose a huge cry of distress from the inner apartment of ladies.
Rama was a refuge and a protector to all the people who were defenceless, weak and miserable. Where is such a protector going now? (said the people).
Where is he who, even if reviled, never gets angry, never does acts that provoke anger, pacifies those who are enraged and shares the sorrows of others going now?
Where is he, that effulgent, magnanimous one who treated us (with the same respect) as he treated his mother Kausalya, going now?
Tormented by Kaikeyi, the king ordered him to go to the forest. Where is he, who happened to be the protector of the people of this world, going now?
Alas, the king must be devoid of any sense as he is sending away Rama, who is dear to the world, is righteous and truthful, to dwell in the forest.
So wept aloud the anguished wives of the king like cows separated from their calves.
Upon hearing the dreadful wailing from the inner apartments of the palace, the king already devasted at the separation from his son, grew even more distressed.
The sacred fire in agnihotra sacrifices was not invoked householders did not cook their food the people did not attend to their daily chores. And the Sun set.
Elephants dropped their morsel of food. Cows did not suckle their calves. Even the mothers were not pleased with their firstborn sons.
The constellation Trishanku, the planets Mars, Jupiter, Mercury and other fierce planets took their position near the Moon.
The stars were shorn of their radiance. The brilliance of the planets diminished. Shrouded in smoke the Visakha constellation appeared in the sky.
After Rama left for the forest, dark clouds appeared (in the sky) like the (waves of) the great ocean uplifted by the speed of the wind which shook the city.
As if covered with darkness, all the cardinal points became agitated. No planet, no star nor was anything (any heavenly body) shining (in the sky).
All of a sudden the people of the city became miserable. No one was interested in eating and enjoying (life).
All the citizens of Ayodhya, afflicted with a series of grief and heaving deep sighs  ceaselessly bewailed at the sight of the lord of the world (Dasaratha).
The faces of the people on the highway were turbid with tears. None looked happy. All were plunged in sorrow.
The breeze did not blow cool. No more did the Moon look pleasant. The Sun did not give warmth to the world. All the world was agitated.
Mothers stopped thinking of their sons and husbands of their wives. Brothers were no longer interested in each other. Every one deserted every one and thought only of Rama.
All the friends of Rama were stupefied. Afflicted with the burden of sorrow they did not leave their bed.
Without magnanimous Rama, Ayodhya thereafter looked like the earth along with its mountains bereft of Indra. Afflicted with fear and sorrow it started shaking dreadfully with the sounds of horses, elephants and warriors. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfirst sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
As long as the dust raised by the wheels of the chariot of Rama (who was departing to the forest) was visible, Dasaratha, the best of the Ikshvakus, could not withdraw his eyes (from  Rama).
So long as king Dasaratha was able to see his exceedingly virtuous and beloved  son (Rama), it appeared that his body kept rising from the earth to have a sight of his son.
When the king could no longer see even the dust, he fell on the ground, despondent and grief stricken.
Kausalya reached for the right hand of Dasaratha (to raise him up) and Kaikeyi the beloved (mother) of Bharata reached for his left.
The king, endowed with rectitude, virtue and also humility, stared at  and said to Kaikeyi with pain.
O Kaikeyi you are a woman of evil conduct. Do not touch my body. I do not wish to see you. You are not my wife or my relation.
Your dependents have nothing to do with me nor I with them. I denounce you since you are a selfseeker without any sense off righteousness.
I renounce the relationship established with you through marriage by taking your hand and circumambulating the fire, both in this world and in the next.
If Bharata feels pleased to secure this imperishable kingdom, then may his obsequial offerings at my funeral not reach me
Then Kausalya, emaciated due to sorrow, lifted the king who was thoroughly coated with dust and returned to the palace.
That virtuous Dasaratha, recalling (the sight of) his son with the robes of an ascetic, burned with remorse as if he had intentionally slain a brahmin or placed his hand in fire.
Turning back again and again at the trail of (Rama's) chariot, the grieving king appeared lustreless like the Sun in eclipse.
The griefstricken king began to lament thinking of his beloved son, and (suddenly) realizing that his son had crossed the limits of the city, said:
I can see the marks of the hooves of the splendid horses carrying my son on the highway but not that magnanimous Rama.
Rama, the best of all my sons who, smeared with sandalpaste and fanned by graceful women used to sleep (with his head) on comfortable cushions will surely, from now on, lie down somewhere at the foot of a tree, (his head) pillowed upon a piece of wood or stone.
That unfortunate Rama, having been covered with dust, will get up from the ground sighing like a bull elephant rising from mount Prasravana.
Surely the forestrovers will be gazing upon the longarmed Rama, protector of the world, as he rises (from the ground) and wanders in the jungle unprotected.
Sita, beloved daughter of Janaka, who is accustomed to comforts, will now wander in the forest troubled by piercing thorns.
Sita who knows not the forest will now live in terror, listening to the hairraising, horrible roars of wild animals.
O Kaikeyi, your desire is fulfilled.  Rule the kingdom as a widow. Without Rama, the best of men, I don't desire to live.
Thus the king, who looked like one after the inauspicious (funeral) bath, surrounded by streams of people entered the most beautiful city (Ayodhya) which portended misfortune.
There the mansions and squares on the highways were all deserted. The temples and marketplaces were closed. The people were weak, fatigued and tormented with grief. The highways were not much crowded. Having seen such a sight of the city on all sides, lamenting and brooding over Rama, Dasaratha entered his palace like the Sun plunging into a cloud.
The palace without Rama, Lakshmana and Sita, stood like a vast, unperturbed lake with serpents snatched away by Suparna (Garuda).
Thereupon Dasaratha lamenting with his throat choked addressed (his attendants) in a low, feeble, melancholic, gentle voice:
Take me quickly to the apartment of Rama's mother, Kausalya. There is no other place where my heart can find solace.
Having heard the king, the doorkeepers took  him to the apartment of Kausalya and  there respectfully made him rest.
His mind tossed restlessly although he entered Kausalya's palace and climbed into the couch.
To the king, the palace deserted by his two sons and his daughterinlaw, seemed like the sky without the Moon.
The valiant maharaja looked around that palace, lifted up his arms and shouted in a loud voice, Oh scion of the Raghus (Rama) you have forsaken me.
Oh how fortunate are those best of men who will live until that time to see Rama return and embrace him.
In the middle of the night which, for him, felt like the night of death Dasaratha said to Kausalya thus:
O Kausalya, my sight that had followed Rama has not yet returned. I cannot see you clearly. Please touch me with your hand.
Having seen the king in bed brooding over Rama, the queen, (Kausalya), sitting by his side, sighed and lamented, deeply anguished. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्विचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortysecond sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Struck by the grief of her son's departure, Kausalya looked at the king who lay on the couch completely exhausted and said to him.
Moving crookedly like a snake, Kaikeyi has released her venom on Rama, the best among men. Now she will move about freely like a sheserpent that has cast off its slough.
Having banished Rama, she is now happy with her desires fulfilled. And like a vicious serpent living in the house she will again frighten me.
It would have been better had I offered her my son as a slave. He would have lived on in the house by doing his duties and begging his food in the city.
You have thrown away Rama from his place as per the whim of Kaikeyi, like the share of offering meant for gods given away to rakshasas by the sacrificers on the new Moon days.
My mightyarmed son, a great archer and a hero, Rama whose gait is like that of the king of elephants, must be entering the forest along with his consort Sita and Lakshmana.
You have banished them as per the desire of Kaikeyi. What will be their plight in the forest, for they have never experienced any hardship earlier
Deprived of all costly things they have been banished at the tender age of youth, a time for enjoying their lives. How will they lead a miserable life subsisting on fruits and roots?
Will there ever be that auspicious moment to end my sorrow? When I can see  Rama here along with his wife and brother?
When will the city of Ayodhya attain that glory when having heard that both the brave brothers have come back the people will rejoice and fill it with uplifted banners?
When will, like the swelling sea on a full Moon day, the city hail the return of Rama and Lakshmana, the best among men?
When will the mightyarmed hero (Rama) enter the city of Ayodhya with Sita in front in the chariot, like a bull following the cow?
When will the people in their thousands shower the parched grain on the highway when my sons (Rama and Lakshmana), subduers of enemies, enter the city?
When shall I see both of them wearing auspicious earrings and holding poweful weapons (bows) and swords high, like two mountain peaks?
When will I see them delightfully moving round the city with young brahmin girls offering them flowers and fruits.
When will Rama, the knower of righteousness, possessing the lustre of gods, and fully mature in age and wisdom come back to me playfully like a threeyearold boy?
O valiant one, in my previous birth I must have undoubtedly hacked off the udders of cows when the calves were thirsting for milk from their mothers.
O best of men I have been forcibly separated from my affectionate son by Kaikeyi just like a cow from its calf by a lion.
I cannot live without my only son who is adept in all scriptures and endowed with all virtues.
Without seeing my beloved son, longarmed and mighty, I have but little strength to live in this world.
I am consumed by this blazing fire of grief caused by separation from my son like the earth scorched in summer by the Sungod with his oppressive raysइत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortythird sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
While Kausalya, the best of women was thus lamenting, virtuous Sumitra spoke to her these righteous words:
My venerable lady, your son Rama is the greatest among men and is endowed with every virtue. Why do you lament in this way? Why do you weep bitterly?
In order to vindicate the words of his great and truthful father, O noble lady,your mighty son has renounced the kingdom and has gone (to the forest). He has stuck to the path so scrupulously followed by the wise, the everlasting results of which can be fully realised in the world to come. Such a peerless son is never to be grieved over.
Blameless Lakshmana, compassionate to all beings, has acted most nobly in this matter for the benefit of his great soul.
The daughter of Videha (Sita) who was used to comforts has knowingly followed your virtuous son into the hardships of forest life.
Your allcompetent son who considers righteousness and truth as wealth, is waving  the flag of fame in this world. What is that which your son did not gain ?
Knowing Rama's sterling purity and greatness the Sun evidently dare not scorch his body with its rays.
A pleasant yet moderately hot and cold breeze blowing through the woodlands will serve Rama at all seasons.
While that sinless Rama sleeps at night, the Moon will comfort him by touching him with cool beams like a father embracing his son.
To the mighty, heroic Rama, that best of men, Brahmalike Viswamitra has bequeathed many divine weapons, seeing him slay Timidhwaja's son (Subahu), lord of demons, in the battle. He will stay fearless in the forest, relying on the strength of his own arms as though he were living in the palace.
When enemies who are targets of his arrows are destoyed, how can this earth, not stay under the command of Rama?
On return from his sojourn in the forest, Rama, endowed with splendour, valour and a strength that brings wellbeing will quickly regain his kingdom.
O Devi Rama is the Sun (light) of the Sun, fire (splendour) of the fire, master (command) of masters, prosperity of the prosperous, the fame of the famous, forbearance of the forbearing, god of the gods and supreme among all beings. Whether he dwells in the forest or in the city, he has no demerit whatsoever.
Rama, the best among men, will soon be coronated with these three namely the earth, the goddess of fortune and Sita.
When the people of Ayodhya saw the godlike Rama departing, clad in robes of kusha and bark, they were moved to tears of grief. What is impossible for him who is unconquerable and whom Sita, like the goddess of fortune, follows.
What is impossible for Rama ahead of whom moves Lakshmana, the best of archers, weilding swords, arrows and other weapons?
I tell you the truth, Kausalya, that you will see Rama's return when the period of exile is complete. Hence give up your sorrow and delusion.
O irreproachable and auspicious one you will see your son, like the rising Moon, touching your feet with his head.
Soon you will see him enthrouned shining in full glory on his return from exile while tears of joy will flow from your eyes.
Desist from grief or tear for Rama, O Devi nothing inauspicious will happen to him you will soon see your son along with Sita and Lakshmana.
O sinless lady, O queen when you are overcome by fear, how can you console others?
O Kausalya,  with a son like Rama, you should not grieve. There is none in this world superior to Rama who stands steady in the path of virtue.
Like a flake of cloud in monsoon, you are going to shed tears of joy soon seeing your son along with his friends bowing to you in reverence.
Your son, bestower of boons, will soon return to Ayodhya and press your feet with his soft, tender hands.
While paying obeisance to you, you will drench your brave son, surrounded by friends, with tears of joy like a mass of clouds drenching the mountain.
Irreproachable and skilful in the use of words, queen Sumitra of cheerful disposition fell silent after thus consoling Rama's mother in various ways.
On hearing the words of Lakshmana's mother the grief in the heart of the queen (Kausalya), mother of Rama, instantly disappeared like the autumnal cloud that holds but little rain. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुश्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfourth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
When the highsouled Rama whose strength was his sense of truth set out for the forest, the faithful people followed him.
The king and the hosts of friends were forcibly sent back but they did not return. They continued to follow the chariot of Rama.
The illustrious and virtuous Rama was as dear to the inhabitants of Ayodhya as the full Moon.
Although entreated by his subjects (not to go) Rama proceeded to the forest  to make his father's vow come true.
Looking at the people with love as if they were his own children and as though drinking them with his glances, Rama appealed to them:
O citizens of Ayodhya may the love and respect you have shown to please me be bestowed specially on Bharata
Bharata, enhancer of the delight of Kaikeyi, possesses an auspicious character. He will do for you everything appropriate, agreeable and beneficial.
Though tender in age Bharata is mature in intellect. Gentle, valiant and virtuous, he will dispel all your fears and act as a true protector.
Endowed with kingly qualities, he is recognised as heirapparent. Therefore, as I did, all of  you should obey the order of the king.
If you desire to please me, act in such a way that the king does not grieve after I have gone to the forest.
The more the son of Dasaratha (Rama) committed to righteousness, the more the subjects desired that he should be their king.
Rama along with Lakshmana attracted the citydwellers who, choked with tears, were looking miserable. It appeared they were bound with his virtues.
Those brahmins who were senior (to him) on three counts like age, wisdom and spirtuality spoke to him from a distance with their heads shaking with age:
O horses of noble breed, turn back Do not carry your master swiftyly any farther. Do good to him.
All animals, especially horses have a keen sense of hearing. Therefore, having listened to our entreaty, turn back.
Your master has a purity of heart. He is righteous, virtuous, brave and firm in resolve, carry him backward and not forward from the city into the forest.
Having seen the aged brahmins muttering pitiful lamentations in this manner, Rama immediately alighted from the chariot.
Then Rama along with Sita and Lakshmana began walking on foot with slow steps towards the forest.
Rama a man of probity and compassion could not ride off in his chariot while those brahmins were trudging far behind.
Having seen Rama thus going towards the forest, those brahmins, highly agitated and distressed, said to him:
This entire order of brahmins with the sacrificial fires on their hsoulders is following you, their wellwisher.
See these umbrellas acquired by us while performing Vajapeya sacrifice are following you like the clouds at the end of the rainy season.
You do not have a royal umbrella and you are scorched by the rays of the Sun. We will offer you shade with the umbrellas acquired during Vajapeya sacrifice.
O dear child, our minds always pursue the study of vedic hymns. For your sake now they are made to follow the life in the forest.
The Vedas are our greatest wealth and they reside in our hearts. Our wives, protected by their fidelity, shall stay at home.
We are not going to revoke our decision. We have made up our minds to follow you (into the forest). If you have no regard for this decision, then who will adhere to the path of righteousness?
O Rama, you are firm in your duty.We beseech you, our heads bowed with swanwhite hair and soiled with dust, to return to Ayodhya.
Many of those brahmins who arrived here have commenced their sacrifices. O dear child, their consummation depends on your return.
O Rama, all these living beings, movable and immovable, are devoted to you and are entreating you with devotion to return. Show consideration to those supplicants.
Although the trees uplifted by the speed of the wind, intend to follow you, their movement is stalled by their roots. Unable, they appear to be weeping.
Even the birds instead of foraging for food are sitting motionless on the trees at one place. They are imploring you, you who are compassionate to all creatures, to return to Ayodhya.
While those brahmins were thus crying out, river Tamasa came into view as if seeking  Rama to turn back to Ayodhya.
Then Sumantra also unyoked the fatigued horses from the chariot and quickly allowed  them to roll and relax on the ground. Having made the horses drink and dip in water, he released them for grazing not far from Tamasa river.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfifth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The scion of the Raghus (Rama), having taken shelter on the lovely bank of Tamasa, glanced at Sita and said to Lakshmana thus:
O Lakshmana, this happens to be the first night of our exile. You should not have any longing in your mind. Wish you well
Look at the deserted forest. The wild animals and birds have returned to their hideouts. They fill the air with their cries.
There is no doubt that now the men and women of Ayodhya, father's capital city must be bewailing our departure.
O best of men because of our many virtues, the people (of Ayodhya) are indeed loyal to the king, to you, to me and to Satrughna and Bharata, too.
What distresses me is the thought that both father and illustrious mother may become blind by repeated weeping (over us).
Righteous Bharata will indeed console parents with words in conformity with  dharma, artha and kama.
As I reflect again and again on the benevolent nature of Bharata, there is no concern in me about my parents, O Lakshmana
You, O Lakshmana, the best among men, have done a good job by accompanying me. Otherwise assistance for Sita's protection would have been sought (necessary).
O Lakshmana, I shall live this night on water alone. I prefer it, though various kinds of forest products are available.
Having said so to Lakshmana, he turned to Sumantra to say O gentle friend, tend the horses with care.
As the Sun was setting, Sumantra tethered the horses, fed them with abundant fodder and sat close to them.
Then the charioteer worshipping the auspicious Sandhya (twilight), and seeing the night approach made  bed for Rama and Lakshmana.
Having seen the bed of leaves made ready on the bank of Tamasa, Rama lay down there along with Sita and Lakshmana.
Having seen that his brother along with his wife had fallen asleep, Lakshmana narrated the many virtues of Rama to Sumantra.
Lakshmana continued to describe Rama's virtues to the charioteer, keeping awake that entire night on the bank of Tamasa until the Sun rose.
Rama spent the night with his subjects not very far from the bank of Tamasa which was crowded with herds of cattle.
On getting up, the brilliant Rama looked at his subjects and said to his brother Lakshmana full of noble qualities:
O Lakshmana, son of Sumitra look at these people, fast alseep under the trees. Out of affection for us, they are even indifferent to their home.
On seeing the people's resolve to take us back, it appears they are prepared to give up their lives rather than abandon their determination.
While they are asleep, we shall quickly mount the chariot and fearlessly proceed on the way.
These loyal inhabitants of Ayodhya, the city of the Ikshvakus will no more sleep again shelterd under the trees.
The prince should deliver the citizens from the sufferings caused by themselves but should not make them suffer on their account.
Lakshmana said to Rama who was the very image of like righteousness O wise one, I like this (proposal). Let us quickly mount the chariot.
Then glorious Rama addressing Sumantra said O master charioteer, harness the chariot. I shall (let us) quickly leave for the forest.
Thereupon the charioteer hurriedly harnessed the splendid horses to the chariot and informed Rama with folded hands:
O best among riders the chariot has been harnessed. O mightyarmed one, board it along with Sita and Lakshmana. All the best
Rama (along with others) mounted the chariot with his belongings, crossed the rapidly flowing Tamasa agitated with whirlpools.
Having crossed the river, the mightyarmed and gracious Rama proceeded on the auspicious and thornless highway arousing confidence even in the timid.
With the intention of confusing the citizens, Rama said to the charioteer, O Sumantra, having seated in the chariot proceed speedly for a while in northerly direction and again turn back the chariot. Accomplish this feat in such a manner that the citizens will not know (where we have gone).
The charioteer did as instructed by Rama, returned to him with the chariot and informed (of its readiness).
When Rama and Lakshmana, perpetuaters of the Raghu race along with Sita were seated on the wellyoked chariot, Sumantra urged the horses to move.
As it augurs well to travel north Sumantra placed the chariot in that direction. Thereafter that great charioteer, Rama, Sita and Lakshmana boarded the chariot and departed.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षट्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortysixth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
When the night advanced towards dawn the citizens were stunned not to see the scion of the Raghus (Rama). Overwhelmed with sorrow they lost their senses.
Anguished and drenched with tears of grief they looked hither and thither but could not find even a trace of Rama.
Those highminded people with sorrowful faces due to separation from sagacious Rama expressed themselves in piteous words:
Fie on this sleep which robbed us of our senses. We are unable to see (now) that broadchested and mightyarmed Rama.
How is it that the mightyarmed Rama who never renders services done to him fruitless has deserted his devoted people and gone into exile?
How could he, the best among the kings of Raghu dynasty, who used to protect us as a father protects his own children, go to the forest, abandoning us?
We all will die here. We will go on the everlasting journey to death. Of what use is this life to us without Rama?
There are plenty of dry logs of wood. We will prepare a pyre with them, set fire to it and we all will enter it.
What shall we say (to the people)? How can we say, 'We have conducted him (to the forest), that scion of the Raghus, that mightyarmed Rama, who is of gentle speech and free from malice?
Seeing us return without Rama, the women, children and  the aged of the city (Ayodhya) will certainly feel miserable and cheerless.
Having left (that city) with the valiant and selfrestrained Rama, how can we now return without him ?
All of them with grief distressed, and with their arms thrown up lamented like cows deprived of their calves.
For a short while they followed the tracks (of the chariot) and after having gone a little distance, they missed the way. They were again submerged in deep sorrow.
When they could not find the tracks of the chariot, those highminded people turned back and said to themselves 'What is this? We have been deceived by fate. What are we to do now?'
Thereafter, all of them, the virtuous people grieving, their minds fatigued, returned to Ayodhya the same way they had come.
On seeing  the city the minds of the people were agitated due to the loss (of their prince). Tears streamed down their eyes, oppressed with sorrow.
This city without Rama just as a river with serpents lifted away by Garuda from its depths looks no longer beautiful.
Plunged in grief, they saw the city deprived of all joy, looking like a sky without the Moon and an ocean without water.
Those people devoid of delight entered their rich mansions with great difficulty. Even though they, stricken with sorrow, looked at men and their own kinsmen they could not recognise them. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyseventh sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The people afflicted with sorrow followed Rama and returned to the city deeply distressed. Eyes overflowing with tears, they longed for death. Smitten with grief, they lost their highmindedness and looked as if their life had been drained out.
The subjects reached their respective homes  and surrounded by their sons and wives  broke down their faces flooded with tears.
The people had no joy in life nor did they find cheer in anything. The merchants did not offer their wares for sale. The marketplace looked graceless (lifeless). (The stocks were empty). The householders did not cook their food.
Neither loss nor acquisition of wealth mattered (to the people). No mother rejoiced over getting her firstborn son.
In every house, women wept and in anguish heaped abuses on their husbands on their arrival at home with words (sharp) like goads on elephants:
For those who do not see Rama, of what use are the houses or spouses or sons or fortunes or delight?
Lakshmana is the only fortunate person in the world who has followed Rama of the Kakutstha race along with Sita to serve them.
The rivers and the lotuspools have done some meritorious acts in the past as a result of which Rama having plunged into their holy waters will make his ablution.
Forests with beautiful groves rivers with vast expanse of waters, mountains with their slopes will enhance the lustre of the scion of the Kakutsthas (Rama).
Whichever hill or forest Rama visits, people will receive him there like a welcome  guest and will not fail to render hospitality to him.
Trees with bunches of cololurful flowers and clusters of blossoms hovering over with black bees will present themselves to the son of the Raghus (Rama).
The hills will exhibit their excellent flowers and fruits off season out of compassion in order to welcome Rama.
The mountains, displaying various wonderful streams here and there, will flow with pellucid waters (for Rama).
The trees on the mountain summits will enchant Rama. Where Rama goes, there will be no room for fear or dishonour.
Before that valiant, strongarmed son of Dasaratha goes too far away (from us), we should follow him.
The shadow of the feet of this magnanimous lord will give us happiness. He alone is the goal and protector of all these people. He is the supreme refuge.
We will serve Sita. You will serve Rama. Such were the words of the distressed women of the city to their husbands. (They continued).
In the forest, Rama will look after your wellbeing and Sita will ensure our, women folk's security.
The people here are choked with grief. Who will like to stay here where life is disagreeable, cheerless, full of despondency and distress?
If Kaikeyi rules this kingdom unethically, we do not want to live here like orphans. What is the use of our progeny or property (in such a place)?
Can Kaikeyi, who has brought disgrace to the race by abandoning her husband and son for the sake of wealth, spare others?
We swear on our sons that as long as Kaikeyi lives, or we live, we will never stay in her kingdom as servants.
Who can live with pleasure under the rule of Kaikeyi of  unrighteous character and wicked behaviour, one who without compassion banished Rama, son of Dasaratha, king of kings?
The entire kingdom, for the sake of Kaikeyi, is under a great calamity. With no support or leader it will definitely go to ruin.
Now that Rama has been banished, the king will not live (long). After his death there will be evidently only lamentations.
Where you are in deep trouble with merits exhausted, it is better to take poison, or follow Rama or walk into the unknown.
Rama along with Sita and Lakshmana has been deceitfully exiled and all of us delivered to Bharata like beasts to a butcher (for protection).
Rama, elder brother to Lakshmana is a tiger among men, a subduer of enemies, powerful like an intoxicated elephant, and a great charioteer. Blue in complexion, he has a face like the full Moon. He has lotuslike eyes, kneelong arms and fleshy clavicles. Endowed with a sweet nature, he always speaks the truth and the first to speak to others. When he roams the forest, charming like the Moon and pleasing to the whole world, he will surely make it look graceful.
Such was the lamentation of the women of the city. Overcome with grief as if frightened at the approach of death, they wept bitterly.
As the women of the city were thus lamenting over the scion of the Raghus (Rama) (sitting) at home, the sun set. Night fell.
With sacrificial fires extinguished and the reading of holy scriptures and sacred recitations stopped, Ayodhya looked as if besmeared with darkness.
With markets closed, the city of Ayodhya cheerless and shelterless looked like the sky without stars.
The women grieved over Rama as if a son or a brother had been exiled. Depressed and distressed, they wept and sobbed. For them, Rama was indeed more than their sons.
With the cessation of singing, celebrations, dance and music, there was no rejoicing in the city. The markets displaying merchandise were shut down. The city of Ayodhya looked like the ocean with its waters diminished.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टचत्वारिशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyeighth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Recollecting his father's command, Rama, the foremost among men, covered a long distance during the remaining part of the night.
While Rama was thus travelling, the auspicious night ended. With the sandhya (morning twilight), worship over, he reached the frontiers of the country.
Watching the villages furrowed at the outskirts, forests in blossom, hearing the gossips of the people living in the midst of villages, Rama felt he was moving very slowly whereas he had actually covered a long distance with those excellent (swift) horses.
(The villagers were speaking among themselves) Fie on the king who is overtaken by passion Alas, the heartless, sinful Kaikeyi, indulging in evil has banished into the forest this prince who is righteous and sagacious, compassionate and selfrestrained. How could this cruel Kaikeyi, by breaking all limits of decorum resort to such atrocious action?
How will Sita, highly fortunate daughter of Janaka and used to comforts endure these sufferings?
Alas, the loveless king Dasaratha now intends to abandon his own sinless son Rama who is dear to the subjects.
Such were the words of people living in villages and hamlets that Rama the valiant lord of Kosala happened to hear as he was crossing the boundaries of Kosala.
He then crossed the river Vedasruti flowing with sacred waters and went in the southern direction where sage Agastya resided.
Travelling for a long time along the river Gomati full of cool waters on whose marshy bank cows grazed, Rama crossed it at the point where it flows into the sea.
Gomati gone, Rama with the swiftmoving horses crossed the river Syandika echoing with the cries of peacocks and swans.
Rama showed Sita vast tracts of land encircled by kingdoms which were formerly bestowed upon Ikshvaku by emperor Manu.
When shall I return and reunite with my father and mother and go hunting in the blooming forest on the bank of the river Sarayu?
In this world, hunting is a unique pleasure. It is regarded as a delightful sport for royal sages. But I do not have a great longing for hunting in the forest on the bank of river Sarayu.
In this world, hunting in the woods is a pleasure for royal sages and is greatly sought after by bowmen. This was later resorted to by others.
The descendant of Ikshvaku related to the charioteer in a sweet voice the thoughts that came to him and went on the way (continued his journey). इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyninth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Having crossed the vast, beautiful kingdom of Kosala, the sagacious elder brother of Lakshmana stood facing Ayodhya with folded palms and said:
O Ayodhya, the best of cities ruled by those born in the Kakutstha race I take leave of you and of all those gods inhabiting and guarding you.
On completion of exile and my filial obligations to king Dasaratha, lord of the world, discharged, I shall, reunited with my parents, see you again.
He looked miserable, his copperred eyes filled with tears. He raised his right hand and said to the villagers who had come to see him:
You have aptly shown your kindness and compassion to me. It is not proper to prolong one's grief. So do go and altend to your duties.
All of them paid their homage by circumambulating the highsouled Rama. Crying bitterly, they stood here and there.
Not yet satisfied (they wanted to linger longer), they stood weeping, while Rama went out of sight just as the Sun disappears at nightfall.
Rama, the best  of men, crossed the auspicious land of Kosala which was worth seeing by kings. It looked charming with sacrificial posts and altars, pleasure gardens and mango groves and tanks filled with water. It was rich with herds of cattle, wealth and foodgrains. It was inhabited by charitable, contented and wellnourished people free from fear from any quarter. And it reverberated with the sounds of Vedic recitations.
Rama, the greatest among those endowed with fortitude, travelled through the middle of the kingdom which was pleasing, prosperous and full of ravishing gardens fit to be enjoyed by kings.
There Rama saw the holy Ganga flowing in three (worlds) with her sacred waters, free from moss, and worshipped by sages.
The holy Ganga, adorned with graceful hermitages situated not far away is visited at times by delightful nymphs who sport in her lakes.
The Ganga is graced by devatas, danavas, gandharvas and kinneras. Wives of several gandharvas always visit this auspicious river.
Since this river flows through heavens for the gods, it is wellknown as 'Devapadmini' where celestial lotuses grow. The river embraces hundreds of hills serving as sporting places and pleasuregardens for gods.
The sound of dashing waters of the Ganga is like her laughter and the foam like her sparkling smile. Here she flows straight like the braid of a maiden and there in whirlpools.
Here the Ganga runs deep but quiet, there she looks perturbed due to fastflowing waters, here she flows with a deep groan and there with a dreadful roar.
Here hosts of celestials take their ablutions and there she shines with lilies of pure blue. Here her banks are curved and there her bed is dotted with patches of white sand.
The river reverberates with the cries of swans, cranes and chakravakas (ruddy goose). It rings intermittently with the chirpings of birds charged with endless pasison.
Here on her banks stand trees adorned as though with garlands, and there in her waters abound fullblown lilies and a forest of lotuses.
Here she is decked with hosts of waterlilies and halfblown flowers while elsewhere she looks intoxicated with the pollen fallen from various flowers.
The river, cleansed of heaps of impurities, appears like a transparent gem. The interiors of forests on her banks always resounds with the trumpeting of mighty, intoxicated, wild elephants guarding the quarters, fit to be the vehicles of gods.
Just like a lady, Ganga is decorated with the best of ornaments her banks are filled with fruits, flowers, tender leaves or shoots and (flowering) shrubs. It is inhabited by birds and brahmins and infested with sisumaras (small whales), crocodiles and serpents.
Mightyarmed Rama reached Srngaberapura on the bank of this consort of the ocean, this Ganga loud with the cries of kraunchas and herons. This sinless, divine Ganga, destroyer of sins who flows from the feet of lord Visnu and by the effulgence (penance) of Sagara's son (Bhagiratha) emerged from the matted locks of lord Siva.
Beholding river Ganga full of waves and whirlpools, the great chariotwarrior (Rama) said to Sumantra: We shall spend the night here.
O charioteer there is a very large ingudi (almond) tree not far from the river, luxuriant with flowers and budding leaves. We shall stay there tonight.
We shall watch Ganga, the best among rivers, whose holy waters are respected by gods, demons, gandharvas, beasts, serpents, men and birds alike.
Lakshmana and Sumantra agreed with Rama, saying 'Be it so' and turned the horses towards that ingudi tree.
Rama, delight of the Ikshvakus, along with his consort and Lakshmana reached that beautiful tree and alighted from the chariot.
Sumantra also got off the chariot, unyoked the horses and with folded palms stood near Rama who had already reached the foot of the tree.
There lived the mighty king Guha who was born in the race of nishadas (hunters) and became famous as their lord. He was a friend to Rama who was like his own self.
Having come to know that Rama, the best among men, had arrived in his region Guha accompanied by senior ministers and people of his clan came to greet him.
When Rama and Lakshmana saw from a distance that Guha, king of the nishadas, was approaching them, they went forward to receive him.
Overwhelmed with grief (to see Rama in bark), Guha embraced Rama and said This is just like Ayodhya to you. What can I do for you? O mightyarmed Rama, who can have the good fortune of receiving  such a beloved guest like you?
Thereafter he quickly brought rice and various kinds of tasty food and drink as welcome offerings and said to him:
O mightyarmed prince, welcome to you This entire land belongs to you. You are our master and we, your servants. Rule this kingdom happily.
All kinds of food to be taken by biting, chewing, drinking and licking are here for you. There is an excellent bed ready. There are also enough fodder for the horses.
Hearing (the words of) Guha, Rama replied By coming on foot to meet us and by displaying your friendliness, you have amply honoured us and pleased us.
Rama embracing him tightly with his strong arms said, O Guha it is fortunate that I am able to see you and your relations in good health. Hope, all is well with your friends, kingdom and (collection of) revenue.
I must give you back whatever you have offered me so affectionately. I am not in a position to accept anything.
You must know me as an ascetic devoted to righeousness,and as a wanderer in the forest wearing garments made of bark, kusa grass and antelope skin, subsisting on fruits and roots.
What I now need is fodder for the horses. Nothing more. If you can do this much, I'll deem it a great honour.
If these horses which are the favourites of my father, king Dasaratha are wellfed, I shall consider myself honoured.
Guha ordered the men standing there Give these horses liquids like water and forage.
Rama wearing the upper garment then offered oblations to Sandhya and partook of only water as refreshment, brought by Lakshmana.
Lakshmana washed the feet of Rama who along with his consort lay upon the ground, and returned to take rest under the tree.
Guha, bow in hand, conversing with Sumantra and Soumitri (Son of Sumitra, Lakshmana) then kept vigil over Rama by remaining awake (all night).
As the wise, illustrious, magnanimous son of Dasaratha (Rama) who was used to pleasures and not discomfort lay on the ground, the long night slipped away. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftieth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Deeply moved to see Lakshmana, scion of the Raghus, keeping awake all night without any pretence for his brother's sake, Guha spoke.
O dear prince this comfortable bed has been arranged for you. Rest happily on this bed.
We are used to all kinds of suffering and you, to comfort. We will keep vigil during the night for the protection of Rama, descendant of the Kakutsthas.
For me, there is none dearer than Rama in this world. I speak the truth. I swear by truth.
I am seeking supreme fame in this world through the attainment of dharma and acquisition of abundant artha by the grace of Rama alone.
I along with my kinsmen, bow in hand, will protect my dear friend, Rama with Sita from every side.
Wandering about in this forest all the time there is nothing unknown to me (here). We can withstand even  a vast army of four divisions.
Lakshmana said to Guha, O sinless one when all of us are under your righteous protection we have nothing to fear.
When Rama, son of Dasaratha, sleeps on the ground with Sita how can I sleep or live or enjoy pleasures?
Look at that Rama whom all the gods and demons cannot face in war sleeps so comfortably on the grass with Sita.
This favourite son of Dasaratha who has similar traits like his father was born after he rigorously practised austerities accompanied by (Vedic) mantras. When he is banished, the king will not live long. Surely this land will soon be widowed.
All the women having cried so much must have quietened down out of sheer exhaustion. That is why perhaps the sounds from the royal palace have ceased.
I doubt whether all of them -- the king, Kausalya and my mother -- can survive this night.
My mother may live looking forward to Satrughna. But, alas Kausalya may die, separated from her valiant son.
That city (of Ayodhya) is full of loyal people. It brings them happiness. It is dear to them. It will perish due to the sad demise of the king.
How can the noble king survive unable to see his highsouled, beloved, eldest son?
Subsequent to the death of the king, Kausalya will die and my mother will follow her.
Past is past (irreversible). My father, brooding over his desire of installing Rama as king unfulfilled, will perish.
Those who will remain present around the king, my father, at the time of his death and perform the funeral rites have their desires fulfilled (for they could attend the king's obsequies).
They will roam about happily in the capital city of my father with its lovely squares, wellaligned broad highways, its mansions and palaces, full of chariots, elephants, horses. It will be echoing with the sound of trumpets. It will be full of the welfare of all. It will be graced by the fairest of courtesans. Filled with wellnourished and contented people, the city dotted with several pleasuregardens and parks, will look splendid with community festivals and fairs.
Will the king be still alive? Will we see the noble king again on our return from exile after the fulfilment of his vows?
Will we ever be able, after completion of the exile, to enter the city of Ayodhya along with Rama who is true to his promise?
While that noble prince (Lakshmana), tormented with grief, stood thus wailing, the night passed off.
Out of great friendship with Guha, Lakshmana thus told the true story of prince (Rama) in the interest of his subject (Guha). (On hearing it) Guha was deeply afflicted with grief and pain and began shedding tears like an elephant suffering from fever.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्यकाण्डे एकपञ्चाश स्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfirst sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
As the night advanced towards dawn, broadchested Rama of great renown said to Lakshmana, son of Sumitra, who had auspicious marks on his body:
O dear Lakshmana the holy night is over and it is time for sunrise. The deep dark bird, the cuckoo is singing.
Listen to the screams of the peacocks in the forest. The Ganga is flowing fast to merge in the sea. We need to cross it.
In response to Rama's desire, Lakshmana, son of Sumitra, one who brings joy to his friends, called Guha and the charioteer (Sumantra) and stood before his brother.
Having heard and accepted Rama's proposal, the king of the nisadas called his ministers at once and said:
Get quickly to the sacred bank (of  Ganga) a strong, auspicious boat equipped with rowing rods and helmsmen who can help cross the river with ease
The ministers heard the orders, soon brought  a beautiful boat and informed Guha (that his orders have been carried out).
Then Guha with folded palms said to Rama: O king, the boat ready. Tell me what else can I do for you.
O best among men, renowned like a god's son and constantly engaged in vows, here is the boat for you to cross the Ganga flowing into the sea. Do board it.
Thereafter the radiant Rama said to Guha, You have fulfilled my desire. Keep all our belongings in the boat.
Rama and Lakshmana then put on their quivers, fastened their swords and holding their bows went towards Ganga along with Sita.
The charioteer (Sumantra) approached the righteous Rama and asked him with folded hands: What can I do?
Rama then caressed  Sumantra with his right hand and said, Sumantra, go back immediately and never be inattentive in serving the king.
You have done enough. I shall now leave the chariot and walk into the great forest.
Having been permitted to go, Sumantra, the distressed charioteer, said to Rama, the best among men, and a descendant of the Ikshvaku race:
None else in this world would be able to live in the forest as you have resolved to, like a common man, along with your brother and spouse.
If your celibacy and your grief are the consequences of your study of the Vedic lore, your compassionate nature and simplicity of character, I think there is no use of all these (virtues).
Valiant scion of the Raghus dwelling in the forest along with Vaidehi (Sita) and brother Lakshmana you will attain the status as if you have won the three worlds.
Deprived of you, O Rama we will come under the control of that sinful Kaikeyi. We will suffer and die.
Rama was like his (Sumantra's) own self. When Sumantra, the charioteer, saw that  Rama was preparing to go afar for a long time, he started weeping aloud in deep distress.
After the flow of tears ceased Sumantra took a sip of water and became sanctified. Then Rama addressed him with sweet words over and over again:
I find none else like you as friendly as you are to the Ikshvaku race. So do whatever you like  to see that king Dasaratha does not brood over me.
I tell you this because the lord of the earth (Dasaratha), is in deep distress. He is old. And he is under the control of his passion.
To make Kaikeyi  happy, do whatever little the great king Dasaratha orders you to do.
The minds of kings create no hurdles in all that they want to do. That is why they rule kingdoms.
Sumantra do things exactly in the manner the great king desires so that he does not feel sad or disappointed.
After offering your salutations, tell these words, on my behalf, to the king who is respectable, bent with age and who has conquered his senses and never experienced any sorrow before.
I do not regret my banishment from Ayodhya to live in the forest. Neither Lakshmana nor Sita does.
Very quickly these fourteen years will come to an end and we will return (to Ayodhya). Then you will see me, Lakshmana and Sita off and on.
Having said this to the king, O Sumantra tell my mother, the other queens including Kaikeyi again and again about my wellbeing and the wellbeing of Lakshmana and Sita. Convey our respectful salutations at the feet of mother Kausalya.
Tell the king to send for Bharata quickly, and on his arrival, he be placed in the position of the king as per his own desire.
On embracing Bharata and making him the crownprince the sorrow due to our departure will not affect you.
You should tell Bharata that just as he treats the king so should he treat all the mothers without differentiating betwen them.
Princeregency is awaiting you because of our father's loving desire. See that through you (your actions) he is able to attain happiness in both the worlds.
When Sumantra was asked by Rama to go back, he grew griefstricken. Having heard all that was said by the scion of the Kakutsthas, he replied:
I beg your pardon for what I have told you out of love. Accept it as the words of a devotee expressed without fear or formality.
Without you how can I go back to the city (of Ayodhya) which, separated from you, is grieving like a lady who has lost her son?
The people who had seen Rama board the chariot will be brokenhearted to see it without him.
Seeing the empty chariot the people of the city will look pitiable just like an army left only with the charioteer after its hero is killed in the war.
Although living at a distance, the subjects feel in their minds that you are just ahead of them. Today they will certainly go without food, brooding over you.
At the time of your departure, O Rama, you have seen all that happened, the hearts of the people exhausted with grief.
You have witnessed the cry of agony raised by the citizens at the time of your banishment. Now when they see the (empty) chariot, they will make it (raise their cry) a hundredfold.
What shall I say to Kausalya? Shall I say 'O venerable queen I have left your son at his maternal uncle's, hence don't grieve'.
How can I lie to her? How can I tell her the unpleasent truth?
How can these excellent horses who used to carry you and your friends till now draw this chariot without you even though they are at my command?
That is why, O sinless one I cannot go back to Ayodhya without you. Allow me to accompany you into your exile.
If you forsake me in spite of my request I shall immediately enter fire along with my chariot.
With my chariot I shall retaliate and prevent all those animals in the forest causing obstacles to your austerities, O Rama
By your grace I experienced the pleasure of driving your chariot, and by your grace, too, I am looking forward to deriving the pleasure of dwelling in the forest.
Be pleased. I wish to stay with you in the forest I long to hear from you these favourable words, 'Stay with me'.
O valiant one, if these horses too could render services to you while you dwell in the forest, they would attain the supreme state.
As I dwell in the forest, I shall serve you with my head bowed. For this I may altogether relinquish Ayodhya or even heaven.
Just as a sinner cannot enter the capital of Indra (heaven), it is impossible for me to enter Ayodhya without you.
It is my cherished desire to take you after the completion of your exile, back to the city (Ayodhya) in this chariot alone.
If I accompany you into the forest, fourteen years will pass like a moment, otherwise it will seem like a hundred years.
O Rama you are affectionate towards your servants. I abide in the path followed by you, my master's son. I am your devoted servant. It does not behove you to forsake me who is faithful.
Repeatedly implored in various ways by the miserable Sumantra, Rama who is compassionate to his servants replied:
O Sumantra, listen I know your deep devotion to me (I also know) you are loyal to your master (Dasaratha). So I am sending you to the city (Ayodhya) from here.
When my younger mother Kaikeyi sees that you have returned to Ayodhya, she will believe that Rama has really gone to the forest.
If queen Kaikeyi is fully satisfied that I have gone to dwell in the forest, she will no longer have any doubt and will believe that righteous king Dasaratha is not a liar.
My prime resolve is that my younger mother should enjoy this prosperous and vast kingdom ruled by her son Bharata.
Sumantra, return to the city with the chariot for my pleasure and also for the pleasure of the king and convey to each of the persons concerned the message exactly as instructed.
Having spoken to the charioteer and consoling him again and again, indefatigable Rama spoke to Guha words full of reasoning:
Guha this forest where people live is not suitable for my stay. It is necessary that I live in a hermitage. So please do the needful.
Seeking the welfare of my father, Sita and Lakshmana I shall enter the forest with matted hair and practise the prescribed austerities which are the adornments of ascetics. Do fetch me the sap of a banyan tree.
Guha fetched the latex quickly and gave it to the prince (Rama) and with that Rama matted his own hair and  Lakshmana's.
The longarmed Rama, the best of men, put on locks of matted hair. As the two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana stood dressed in bark wearing crowns of matted hair, they resembled two resplendent ascetics.
Having adopted the path of ascetics along with Lakshmana, Rama said to his friend Guha:
O Guha you must be vigilant about your army, treasury, forts and provinces. A kingdom, it is (rightly) said, is protected with great difficulty.
Rama, Delight of the Iksvakus, then permitted Guha to take leave. And departed quickly with his consort and Lakshmana in peace.
Seeing the boat on the river bank and intending to cross the swiftly flowing Ganga, Rama, descendant of the Iksvakus said to Lakshmana:
O Lakshmana, the best of men the boat stands ready, get into it slowly (carefully), and then help the noble Sita board it by holding the beam (which balances the boat).
Having heard his brother's command the selfcontrolled Lakshmana did as he was told.He first helped Sita get into the boat and  thereafter boarded it himself.
With the boat boarded by the glorious Rama, Lakshmana's elder brother, Guha, king of the nishadas urged his kinsmen (to row the boat).
Resplendent Rama boarded the boat and muttered for his own safety mantras befitting brahmins and kshatriyas.
Rama of undimmed radiance sipped the waters (of the Ganga) in accordance with the scriptures and with great pleasure and paid obeisance to the river with Sita and Lakshmana.
Having permitted Sumantra and Guha with his army to leave, Rama seated on the boat urged the boatmen to proceed.
The wellruddered boat rowed by the helmsmen and propelled by strong oars, swiftly crossed the waters of the river.
When the boat reached the midstream that unblemished Sita with palms folded invoked the river thus:
O Ganga, protected by you, this son (Rama) of Dasaratha, the sagacious maharaja, will carry out his father's command. He along with his brother will return after living in the forest for full fourteen years. O fortunate Devi, he will worship you in delight for fulfilling all his desires after his safe return.
O Devi, you are Tripathaga, flowing in three directions (worlds). You behold the region of Brahma and happen to be the spouse of the king of the ocean in this world (of mortals).
O Devi O lovely Ganga I offer you my obeisance and my adorations. After the safe return of Rama, the tiger (best) among men, from the forest and after he regains the kingdom I shall give a hundred thousand cows, clothing and delicious food to brahmins as a mark of regard, which will please you.
O Devi after my return to Ayodhya  purified by my austerities, I shall worship you by offering a thousand pots of nectar and food in the form of meat.
I shall worship all those deities inhabiting your banks and all sacred spots and temples.
O sacred one may the blemishless, mightyarmed Rama accompanied by me and his brother reenter Ayodhya after the exile.
While the unblemished, auspicious Sita was thus addressing (the river), the boat swiftly reached the south bank.
Rama, the best of men and tormentor of enemies, after  reaching  the other side of the river, left the boat and proceeded with Sita and his brother.
The longarmed Rama then said to Lakshmana,  enhancer of the joy of Sumitra: Whether in populated areas  or in solitary places, excercise alacrity in the matter of protection.
In this desolate forest which we had never seen before we must certainly be concerned about our protection. O Lakshmana , let Sita follow you
O best of men, I will follow you and Sita and keep watch. We must ensure  mutual protection.
We have not yet confronted any hardship. From now on Sita will come to know the difficulties of forest life.
Now she will enter the forest which is devoid of concourse of people, farms and pleasure groves and which is uneven and inaccessible and full of deep ditches.
Having heard the words of Rama, Lakshmana went ahead and Rama, delight of the Raghus, walked behind Sita.
The wretched Sumantra kept gazing at Rama who swiftly reached the other side of the Ganga and only when he could not see him because of long distance, he turned away his gaze and, overcome with grief, shed tears.
Having crossed that mighty river, the highsouled Rama, bestower of boons and equal in splendour, to the Protector of the world reached Vatsa by and by, a highly prosperous country inhabited by happy people.
Famished, they (Rama and Lakshmana) killed a boar, a rishya (whitefooted male antelope), a spotted deer and a great deer with black stripes. They partook the meat and reached a tree by evening where they rested for the night.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्विपञ्चाश स्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftysecond sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
On reaching the foot of the tree, Rama offered oblations to Sandhya of the west. And then he who is the best in keeping people in good humour said to Lakshmana:
We will have to spend this first night without Sumantra and away from human habitation. (Yet) you need not worry.
O Lakshmana, from now on we must be sleeplessly vigilant at night. The welfare and safety of Sita depend on us both.
O Lakshmana, we will have to somehow pass this night, sleeping on the ground spread with whatever we have procured.
Rama who deserved a luxurious bed lay down on the ground and uttered these beneficial words to Lakshamana:
O Lakshmana, the maharaja must be having a painful sleep tonight. But Kaikeyi with her desires fulfilled, ought to feel satisfied.
After the arrival of Bharata, I hope queen Kaikeyi does not deprive the king of his life for the sake of the kingdom?
That lustful king, having come under the hold of Kaikeyi, has been deprived of my presence. What can that forlorn and aged king do?
Reflecting on the calamity and mental aberration of the king, I think passion is stronger than wealth and righteousness.
O Lakshmana, will even an illiterate man for the sake of a woman ever abandon his son like me who is faithful and obedient, as did my father?
Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, with his wife will alone enjoy like an emperor this kingdom of Kosala full of happy people.
The king is advanced in age and I have to dwell in the forest. Therefore, Bharata alone will be the chief of this entire kingdom.
Any king who abandons dharma and artha and adopts a life of pleasure will very soon reach this state as Dasaratha has attained.
O handsome Lakshmana I think Kaikeyi has come to our house for the destruction of Dasaratha, for my banishment and enthronement of Bharata in the kingdom.
Intoxicated with her good fortune will not Kaikeyi torment Kausalya and Sumitra for my sake?
O Lakshmana, because of me mother Sumitra should not live in sorrow. Therefore, tomorrow morning go back to Ayodhya from here itself.
I shall go with Sita into the Dandaka forest and you be the protector of the helpless, Kausalya.
Kaikeyi who is a woman of heinous deeds may follow, out of hostility, an unjust way in respect of my mother. In that case my mother may be entrusted to the care of Bharata who is righteous.
O Lakshmana, surely in one of her previous births did my mother separate women from their sons. That is why this (calamity) has befallen her.
Kausalya nurtured me for a long time and reared me with great difficulty. When she was going to enjoy the fruits of her labour, I have been separated from her. Fie upon me
O Lakshmana, I am causing endless sorrow to my mother. May no mother give birth to a son like me
(On hearing my banishment) her myna would say to her parrot, 'O parrot, bite the foot of the enemy (Kaikeyi)'. I think  that bird is  a greater source of joy to my mother than I, O Lakshmana
My mother has less fortune and more grief like a woman without a son, O Lakshmana, subduer of enemies For her, what is the use of a son like me who cannot render any service to her?
My mother is unlucky as she has been separated from me. Extremely distressed, she must have plunged into an ocean of grief.
Once enraged, O Lakshmana I can overpower Ayodhya, even the whole world all by myself with my arrows. But exhibition of prowess without any reason is not desirable.
O sinless one, I did not get myself coronated owing to fear of unrighteous conduct and fear of the other world.
Like this and in many other ways Rama lamented pitifully in that desolate forest. When his face was filled with tears, he sat silently in the night.
Lakshmana consoled Rama who ceased to lament like fire with extinguished flames or like a motionless sea:
O Rama, foremost of warriors, it is certain that since your departure, the city of Ayodhya must be lustreless like night without the Moon.
This is not the way you should lament, O Rama. O foremost of men, by doing so you are disheartening me and Sita as well.
Without you Sita or I will not survive even for a moment like a fish taken out of water, O Rama
Without you, O Rama, tormentor of enemies, I wish to see neither father nor Satrughna nor Sumitra nor even heaven itself
Thereafter Rama and Sita, the duo, nurturers of righteousness, from their comfortable  seats moved to the bed wellmade under the banyan tree not far (from there where they were sitting) and lay down (to sleep).
Rama, the tormentor of enemies, listened, out of love, to the excellent and copious words of Lakshmana and permitted him to live in the forest for the entire period of fourteen years by observing the prescribed code of conduct as enjoined on  life in the forest.
Then the two mighty perpetuators of the Raghu race, who were like two lions dwelling on the slopes of mountains, lived in that lonely forest  without fear or hesitation.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रिपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftythird sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
They (Rama, Sita and Lakshmana) spent that auspicious night under that great tree and set out from there after the bright sun rose.
Illustrious Rama, Sita and Lakshmana entered the deep forest and saw the different regions of the land and other enchanting places which they had never seen before and proceeded towards the region where the river Yamuna merged with Bhagirathi Ganga.
Walking on the safe path and observing various kinds of trees Rama said to Lakshmana at the end of the day:
O son of Sumitra, look at the column of smoke rising like the banner of the venerable firegod near Prayaga. I think an ascetic dwells nearby.
We have surely reached the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna which can be ascertained from the sounds of clashing water.
Here are logs of wood cut into pieces by forestdwellers, living on forest products. You can see various trees near the hermitage of sage Bharadwaja.
The two archers (Rama and Lakshmana) reached comfortably (walking at an easy pace) by evening the hermitage of sage Bharadwaja near the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna.
Seeing Rama approaching the hermitage the deer and the birds were frightened. Proceeding on the path, for a while Rama reached (the place of) Bharadwaja.
Thereafter the two heroes followed by Sita arrived at the hermitage and, wishing to see the sage, waited at a distance.
Rama entered the hermitage and saw that highsouled Bharadwaja surrounded by his disciples. He was a distinguished sage who (himself) kindled sacrficial fires and acquired spiritual insight by practising rigid austerities with concentration of mind and ascetic powers. Rama, Lakshmana and Sita paid their obeisance to that great sage.
Lakshmana's elder brother (Rama) introduced himself (to Bharadwaja), O venerable one, we are both sons of Dasaratha, Rama and Lakshmana.
This blessed one is my consort, Sita, daughter of Janaka. Irreproachable she has followed me to the desolate grove of penance (hermitage).
This is the son of Sumitra, my beloved younger brother, a man of firm resolve. He has accompanied me when I was sent on exile to the forest by my father.
O venerable one on my father's command we entered the desolate forest of penance. Subsisting on roots and fruits, I shall practise the righteous way of life.
Sage Bharadwaja heard the words of sagacious Rama and offered a bull, water (for washing feet) and arghya (offering to a guest).
The ascetic who practised severe penance offered them different kinds of food and drink made from roots and fruits available in the forest. He also provided them a place to rest in.
There the sage sat, surrounded by hermits, animals and birds after having welcomed Rama with due honour.
Rama accepted the hospitality of Bharadwaja and took a seat in front of the sage, who spoke to him these words in conformity with righteousness:
O descendant of the Kakutstha dynasty, I am able to see you on your arrival here after a long time. I have also heard about your unwarranted banishment.
This sacred and solitary region near the confluence of two great rivers (Ganga and Yamuna) is a pleasant place. You may stay here comfortably.
Rama, ever devoted to the wellbeing of every one, heard Bharadwaja and replied to him with these auspicious words:
O venerable sage, I feel the people living in nearby villages and towns, perceiving that we can be easily seen here, will frequent this ashram. This is the reason I don't wish to stay here.
O revered one, Janaka's daughter (Sita) deserves comfort. Suggest a solitary and agreeable place for our hermitage where she can enjoy herself.
On hearing the auspicious words of Rama conveying his intention, the great sage Bharadwaja replied to him thus:
O my son ten krosas (about twenty miles) from here is a mountain wellknown as  Chitrakuta, resembling 'Gandhamadana'. That mountain frequented by maharshis is sacred. It looks pleasant from all sides. Monkeys, apes and bears wander there and it is an appropriate place for you to live in.
As long as one beholds the peaks of mount Chitrakuta, he will be inspired to do good deeds and will not employ his mind in sinful thoughts.
On the Chitrakuta mountain many ascetics wandered about (lived) for hundreds of years carrying on penance. In the process they became so much emaciated that they looked as if they were left (only) with the skulls on their heads. (In the end) they ascended heaven.
O Rama, I think you will enjoy your stay there in a solitary place. Or else, you may live with me here during the period of banishment.
Bharadwaja, who knows his duty honoured Rama, his beloved guest with his consort and brother by extending all kinds of hospitality.
At Prayaga, while the great sage Bharadwaja was narrating to Rama sitting near him several interesting anecdotes, the holy night set in.
The exhausted scion of the Kakutsthas, used to comforts, stayed in the lovely hermitage of Bharadwaja for the night with Sita, as the third member (of the group).
When the night passed into dawn, Rama the best of men approached the resplendent Bharadwaja and said.
O venerable sage devoted to truth, we have spent the night in your hermitage. Please permit us to depart for the dwellingplace (suggested by you).
When the night came to a close, Bharadwaja said (to Rama): You may proceed to Chitrakuta which abounds in roots, fruits and honey.
O mighty Rama, I think mount Chitrakuta is the right place for you to stay. Go there. That mountain is full of trees of every kind, is inhabited by kinneras and uragas (serpents). It echoes with the cries of peacocks, is frequented by mighty tuskers. Filled with fruits and roots, it is sacred and pleasant.
You will see, O Rama, herds of elephants and deer ranging in the forest.
Your heart will be filled with joy while you wander with Sita beholding rivers, waterfalls, plateaus, caverns and mountaintorrents.
The auspicious mountain (Chaitrakuta) resounds with the note of cheerful lapwings and cuckoos. Intoxicated elephants and deer move about in the enchanting mountain. There you may settle down in a hermitage. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुःपञ्चाश स्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfourth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
After spending the night, the princes, destroyers of enemies, offered obeisance to that great sage (Bharadhwaja) and went towards that mount Chitrkuta.
Seeing them setting forth, the great sage blessed them for a safe journey and followed them like a father following his children.
Then that great effulgent sage Bharadwaja began to speak to Rama whose strength was truth.
Reaching the confluence of rivers Ganga and Yamuna, O Rama and Lakshmana best among men proceed along the Kalindi (Yamuna) river flowing westward.
On reaching that swiftflowing river Yamuna, O Rama and Lakshmana O scions of the Raghu race, you will find an ancient spot (on the river bank). There make a raft and cross Kalindi, daughter of the Sun.
There you will find a large, banyan tree with its lush green leaves, looking dark with its densely grown trees. It is inhabited by siddhas. Sita should offer with folded palms invocations for her wellbeing.
Reaching that tree, you may tarry or proceed further. A krosa from there, you will see a beautiful forest filled with dark trees mixed with Palasas and badaris and bamboos on the Yamuna.
That path leads to Chitrakuta. I had travelled through it several times. It is beautiful, smooth and safe from forest fires.
The great sage returned after instructing Rama about the path. So be it, said Rama and offering obeisance requested Bharadhwaja to go back.
With the sage gone, Rama said, O Saumitri (son of Sumitra) we are lucky, for the sage has been so kind.
Thus talking with one another, the two nobleminded tigers (best) among men advanced towards river Kalindi (Yamuna) with Sita walking in front.
Thereafter, they all reached the rapidly flowing river Kalindi and began pondering how to cross it.
Then they both made a big wooden float by joining logs of wood, spreading bamboos on it and covering it with the (fragrant roots of) Ushira bushes.
The valiant Lakshmana cut the stems of reeds and branches of the Jambu tree to prepare a comfortable seat for Sita (on that float).
Rama, son of Dasaratha helped his beloved (Sita), who was looking inconceivably like Lakshmi (goddess of wealth) and was feeling a little bashful while stepping on to the float.
Rama placed robes and ornaments on the float by the side of Sita and a spade and a basket along with weapons.
Those valiant sons of Dasaratha held the float (firmly) to help Sita step on to it. Then they crossed the river carefully.
On reaching the middle of the river Yamuna, Sita made reverential salutations to her saying O goddess, I am crossing you, may safety be ours and may my husband fulfil his vow After Rama's (safe) return to the city (of Ayodhya) ruled by the Ikshvaku kings, I shall worship you with a thousand cows and a hundred pots of wine.
While Sita with her fair complexion was thus invoking river Yamuna with folded hands they reached the southern bank.
They crossed the swiftflowing river Yamuna, daughter of the Sungod, full of waves and with trees growing thick on her banks.
Having crossed the river, they left the float and proceeded from the adjoining forest of Yamuna and reached the dark, cool banyan tree covered with lush green leaves.
Having reached the banyan tree, Sita invoked it, saying, 'O great tree I offer you my salutations. May my husband fulfil his vow May I behold Kausalya and the illustrious Sumitra on my return. Saying so, she went round the tree offering reverential salutations with folded hands.
Beholding the obedient, blemishless, beloved Sita invoking blessings, Rama said to Lakhsmana:
O Lakshmana, best among bipeds (men) and brother of Bharata walk ahead with Sita and I shall follow with weapons.
Whatever fruit or flower the daughter of Janaka asks for, get it. Whatever pleases her mind give it.
The daughter of Janaka walked between them like a sheelephant between two males.
That gentle lady enquired of Rama about a tree or a shrub or a creeper in full bloom which she did not see before.
Cheered by Sita's indents, Lakshmana brought her various beautiful plants and stocks of flowers.
Beholding the river Yamuna with its wonderful water and sand echoing with the cackle of swans and cranes, Sita went ecstatic.
After walking a krosa into the forest on the bank of Yamuna, the two brothers killed many deer suitable for sacrifice and ate them.
They reached the tableland on the bank of that river and moved in high spirit in the lovely forest resounding with cries of flocks of peacocks and teeming with monkeys and elephants. Finally they selected  a spot for their stay.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfifth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
When the night was over, Rama, Delight of the Raghus, gently awakened Lakshmana who was asleep.
Listen to the songs of the forest birds, O son of Sumitra O tormentor of foes it is time we set out.
Awakened by his brother in time, Lakshmana shook off his sleep, his drowsiness and his fatigue due to journey.
Then they all rose, touched the river's auspicious waters and went the way the sage had directed -- towards mount Chitrakuta.
Early in the morning Rama set out with Lakshmana and said this to Sita with eyes like lotus petals:
O daughter of Videha behold these kimsuka trees in full bloom everywhere. With the passing of winter, they appear bright as though they are garlanded by their own flowers.
Behold these bhallataka trees in full bloom though there are none to enjoy them. They are bent with fruits and leaves. Surely, we can live here. (This place is fit for our habitation).
O Lakshmana see the honeycombs of the size of wooden vessels crowded by the honeybees hanging down from every tree.
In this delightful forest region strewn with fallen flowers the peacock is responding to the screaming of natyuha bird.
See these flocks of singing birds followed by herds of elephants. See this mount Chitrakuta with its towering peaks.
O dear this sacred forest of Chitrakuta standing on a level land is full of various trees. Let us enjoy it.
Then they both along with Sita walked to that lovely, delightful Chitrakuta mountain.
Rama arrived at that enchanting mountain full of various kinds of birds, fruits and roots, and sweet water. (And said to Lakshmana:)
O gentle one this enchanting mountain with different kinds of trees and creepers and many roots and fruits appears to be a happy place to live in.
Great sages reside on this high mountain. Let it be our habitation and let us enjoy our life here, O handsome one
Thus Rama, Sita and Lakshmana approached the hermitage of sage Valmiki and paid obeisance to him with folded hands.
The great sage Valmiki conversant with righteousness was delighted. He honoured them by extending welcome and said 'Be seated'.
The mightyarmed elder brother of Lakshmana revealed his identity to the sage by duly introducing himself. And said then to Lakshmana:
O handsome Lakshmana, make a hut with strong, sound logs of wood. My mind impels me to stay here.
Having heard Rama, Saumitri, the subduer of enemies fetched different kinds of logs of wood, and with them made a hut and thatched it with leaves.
Rama saw the goodlooking leafhut with mats tied around as walls, and said to Lakshmana who was awaiting further command with rapt attention:
O Lakshmana those who intend to live for long (in this hut), should pacify the deity presiding over here. Therefore, we shall bring the venison of a black antelope and make necessary offerings.
Slay an antelope and bring it here quickly. O Lakshmana The rites as prescribed by the scriptures will have to be carried out. You may recollect that tradition.
Lakshmana, slayer of heroes on the enemy's side, understood and implemented what he was told. Rama again said to him:
Cook this venison, O handsome one We will offer it to the presiding deity of this hut. Hasten, the day and time are fixed (for the rites)
Then the powerful son of Sumitra killed a black antelope fit for offering, and offered it to the wellkindled fire.
With the blood drained out of the venison, Lakshmana roasted it and cooked it well, and then said to Rama, the tiger (best) among men.
This black antelope with all its limbs is wellcooked. O divine sire, you may make the offering to Vastu devata in which you are proficient.
Virtuous Rama, who was an expert in the recitation of mantras, took his bath and his mind controlled, intoned briefly all the mantras appropriate to the completion of the ritual.
Sanctified with the worship of all the gods, Rama of immeasurable lustre felt a great happiness on entering the hut.
Rama, offered oblations to Visvadevas, Rudra and Visnu,  performed the auspices for the appeasement of the household deity. And having muttered japa silently in conformity with tradition, he took his ablution in the river as enjoined (by the sastras) and offered his final oblations for the expiation of his sins.
Rama, son of the Raghus, made altars in all the quarters, places of worship and sacred spots for fire befitting a hermitage.
Bestowed with auspicious qualities, Rama and Lakshmana along with Sita propitiated those celestial beings with garlands of forest flowers, fruits and roots, wellcooked venison, water, muttering of prayers as expounded in the Vedas, faggots and kusa grass and entered that auspicious hermitage.
Until Rama reached the southern bank, Guha kept talking with Sumantra for long and returned home with great sorrow.
Positioned there, they could mark their arrival at Bharadwaja's at Prayaga, their stay (nighthalt) and their onward journey to Chitrakuta mountain.
Permitted by Rama to leave, Sumantra harnessed the best of horses and set out for the city of Ayodhya with a heavy heart.
Beholding the fragrancefilled forests, rivers, lakes, villages and  towns on the way, Sumantra quickly crossed them.
The charioteer reached Ayodhya on the third day at dusk and found the city cheerless.
Beholding the silent city, almost empty, the deeply depressed Sumantra, afflicted with gushing tears reflected:
Has the city along with its elephants, horses, people and its king perished in the fire of grief for Rama?
Absorbed in these thoughts, the charioteer came to the citygate, carried by the swiftfooted horses, and quickly entered the city.
Meanwhile as the charioteer was moving towards the city, hundreds and thousands of men came pouring towards him enquiring, 'Where is Rama?'
I took leave of the great, righteous Rama on the bank of the Ganga and have returned with his permission. (replied Sumantra).
Hearing that they had (the trio) crossed the river Ganga, the people, with their faces filled with tears sighed and saying 'Fie upon us Alas, Rama' cried out aloud.
He saw them gathering in groups, saying, Henceforth we will not be able to see Rama and without him, we are lost indeed.
No longer will we see Rama at sacrifices, weddings, great assemblies and at places of charitable activity.
Rama looked after his people like a father always thinking what was good for them, dear to them and comfortable to them.
(He) heard wailings of women looking through the window and of the people in marketplaces burning with sorrow over Rama's exile.
Sumantra with his face muffled, drove along the highway straight to the palace of king Dasaratha.
Quickly alighting from the chariot, he entered  the king's palace and crossed the seven courtyards overcrowded with people.
Women from mansions, sevenstoried buildings and from royal palaces, sighted him and pained at not seeing Rama cried out 'Alas, Alas'.
The women in great anguish stood silently looking at one another, their large eyes flooded with overflowing tears.
From different spots in the palace, Sumantra heard the sobs and whispers of Dasaratha's wives who were tormented with the sorrow of Rama's exile.
The charioteer left with Rama and returned without him. What can he say to the wailing Kausalya?
I think it is indeed difficult for Kausalya to live wherever and whichever way she tries as she has been separated from her son. (the queens said).
Listening to the correct words of the king's wives, he immediately entered the palace as if in flames (of grief).
On entering the eighth courtyard, he saw in a pale white chamber king Dasaratha desolate, anguished and withered with the sorrow of separation from his son.
Sumantra approached the king who was seated, paid obeisance to him and conveyed Rama's words verbatim.
The king silently listened to Rama's message. Bewildered and tormented by the grief of Rama's absence, he fell down on the ground in a swoon.
The moment the lord of the earth fell down on the ground unconscious, the women in the inner apartment burst into tears, raising their arms.
Having seen her husband collapsed on the ground, Kausalya assisted by Sumitra lifted him up and said to him thus:
O distinguished king, why are you not enquiring from the messenger about him  (Rama) who is capable of performing arduous tasks?
O descendant of the Raghus are you ashamed of having done an injustice? Arise. you may be a blessed one (for fulfilling your promise). If you grieve, none will help you.
Kaikeyi for fear of whom you dare not ask the charioteer about Rama, O king is not here. You may speak to him without fear.
Absorbed in grief, Kausalya spoke to the maharaja in a voice choked with tears and then collapsed on the floor.
All those women saw weeping Kausalya as well as their husband fallen on the ground and wailed loudly in a chorus.
Having heard the sound emanating from the inner apartment, people, old, young and women, of the city lamented. The city was crowded again. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyseventh sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
When the king regained his consciousness and was consoled, he summoned the   charioteer to hear news about Rama.
Then the charioteer with folded palms approached the king who, deeply afflicted with grief and pain, was brooding over Rama alone. Aged Dasaratha was heaving deep sighs like a newlycaptured, indisposed elephant.
Seeing the dejected charioteer standing before him, the desolate king covered all over with dust and his face bathed in tears, said to him in extreme grief:
O charioteer Rama is rightous and he is acustoomed to all sorts of comfort. Taking refuge at the foot of a tree how shall he live and what shall he eat?
How can the son of the guardian of the earth who is accustomed to a comfortable bed and not to undeserved suffering lie down on the ground like an orphan, O Sumantra
Wherever Rama went, elephants, chariots and footsoldiers followed him. How can he (now) live in the desolate forest where he has taken refuge?
How can the two young men along with Vaidehi live in the forest infested with black cobras and wicked, wild animals?
O Sumantra how did those two princes along with pitiable, delicate Sita, alight from the chariot, and enter the forest on foot?
You are blessed indeed, O charioteer to have seen my sons entering the outskirts of the forest like Aswinis stepping into the region of the Mandara mountain.
Upon reaching the forest, O Sumantra what did Rama, Lakshmana and Sita say?
Tell me, O charioteer where Rama sat, where he slept, what (food) he ate. Only your words will enable me to live like Yayati among saints.
Thus questioned by the king the charioteer, his voice choked with tears and words faltering in grief, addressed the king:
With palms folded and head bowed, O great king Rama offered his salutations to you in confirmity with righteousness and said to me:
'Convey on my behalf, O charioteer to my illustrious father who is known for his selfknowledge, and is worthy of homage, that I am saluting his feet with my head bowed.
'On my behalf convey, O charioteer, without any distinction, my salutations to all the women befitting their status and tell them I was enquiring about their wellbeing.
'Convey my mother carefully my saluations and my wellbeing and tell her:
'O mother, adhering to the righteous path and performing in time the rituals in the chamber of sacrificial fire, offer your services at the feet of king Dasaratha as if he were a god.
'O mother, conduct yourself with other mothers without pride and egoism. Ensure that venerable Kaikeyi remains welldisposed towards the king.
'Behave towards young Bharata as to a king. Irrespective of age, a king is a king. (Hence should be honoured). You should keep this rajadharma (royal prerogative) in mind.
'Tell Bharata of my welfare and tell him on my behalf that he should honour all our mothers equally.
'The king is advanced in age. Do not restrict him in any manner. Carry out his orders as prince regent, and live happily'.
Shedding profuse tears, Rama continued, 'Look after my mother who is covetous of her son as your own mother'.
While saying this the red lotuslike eyes of illustrious Rama streamed with tears, O maharaja
But Lakshmana, seething with anger and sighing said, 'For what offence has this king's son  been banished'?
'The king, too, submitting to the trash command of Kaikeyi has perpetrated an act, just or unjust (he knows better), for which we are made to suffer so much.
'Whether it was out of greed (for the kingdom) or for (the execution of) the boon bestowed, this act of banishment is by all means wicked'.
'Or he might have thought he is the overlord and can do as he likes. (Or, he might have done this for fear of God) Otherwise, I do not see any reason for the abandonment of Rama'.
'Unjustly, foolishly and without (proper) consideration Rama has been banished. This will (definitely) cause sorrow'.
'I do not regard the great king as my father. Rama alone is my brother, protector, friend and father.
'How can anyone in this world be pleased with you for deserting Rama, the beloved of all, and ever devoted to their welfare?
'Having banished the righteous Rama, the delight of all subjects and, thereby, antagonizing the entire world, how can you claim to be their king?'
O great king as for that sensitive Janaki, she stood sighing, stupefied and oblivious (of the past), yet smiling as though her mind was possessed by an evil spirit.
That glorious princess Sita who had never experienced any adversity earlier, weeping with sorrow, could not even speak to me anything.
When she saw me leaving, she looked at her husband with a dry (pale) face and suddenly burst into tears.
Supported by Lakshmana's arms, Rama stood, his face streaming with tears and palms folded, while the wretched Sita, glaring at me and the royal chariot, weeping. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyeighth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Listening to the charioteer, the best of ministers (Sumantra), the king asked him to tell the rest.
Having heard him, Sumantra, overcome with tears, related further details of Rama's message.
O King the heroes in bark robes and with matted hair crossed the Ganga and proceeded towards Prayaga.
Lakshmana walked ahead guarding Rama, the delight of the Raghus. While I returned helplessly seeing them go.
When Rama set out for the forest, and I turned back, my horses shedding hot tears were reluctant to walk the path.
Thereafter, controlling my grief and paying obeisance to both the princes with folded palms, I ascended the chariot and returned.
There along with Guha I waited for (three) days that Rama might call me back.
O great king even trees with their flowers, buds and shoots throughout your empire have withered because of the calamity on Rama.
Water in rivers, ponds and lakes has heated up while all the foliage in the forests and gardens have shrivelled.
No living being move about and even wild animals roam no more. Overwhelmed with grief on account of Rama a great silence pervades the forest.
The water in the lotus lakes, O king, has become turbid. The blue lotuses have withered and their shrivelled petals are submerged in water. The fishes and aquatic birds are hidden under waters.
Bunches of flowers grown in water and on land, as well as fruits with their scant fragrance do not shine as before.
Pleasuregardens are all deserted as the birds have vanished. O best of men, as such they do not look beautiful.
None greeted me when I entered Ayodhya, People heaved sighs repeatedly when they did not see Rama.
Beholding the royal chariot arrive without Rama, all were on the highway shedding tears of anguish.
When the women from mansions, sevenstoried buildings and from royal palaces saw the chariot without Rama, they, overwhelmed with sorrow, cried, 'Alas, Alas'.
The women, with their large, bright eyes flooded with gushing tears looked in silence at one another in deep anguish.
I did not see any difference in the degree of anguish among friends, those who are not friends and and those who are indifferent. (The degree of agony was same in all).
O maharaja, Ayodhya is filled with cheerless people with deep sighs, agonised voices and pale faces depressed and distressed due to Rama's exile. (Even) elephants and horses look spiritless. For me it (the city) resembles (dejected) Kausalya deprived of her son.
At these words of the charioteer, the king in deep distress replied with a voice choked with tears:
Incited by Kaikeyi of sinful relations and sinful motive, I did not consult expert, elderly counsellers.
For the sake of a woman, this act was committed in great haste, without consulting friends or ministers or men of prudence.
Surely it is destiny and this calamity has befallen for the wilful destruction of the (entire) race, O charioteer
O Charioteer, if ever I have rendered you any favour, quickly  take me to Rama. My life is hastening me (fast running out).
If my command prevails today, Rama may be brought back. Without Rama I cannot live for a moment even.
Where is that Rama, elder brother to Lakshmana who has wellshaped teeth and wields a mighty bow? If I can see him along with Sita I will survive.
If I cannot see Rama of redcoloured eyes, the mightyarmed one and wearing earrings bedecked with precious stones I shall surely go to the abode of Yama, the god of death.
What else can be of greater sorrow to me who having reached this state, am still unable to see Rama?
Ah Rama, Ah Lakshmana, Ah unfortunate Vaidehi, you do not know that I am dying  like an orphan because of my grief.
The king whose mind was extremely enfeebled due to grief and who was immersed in a sea of tears which he was unable to cross continued:
O queen Kausalya, I am completely immersed in this ocean of sorrow. The misfortune due to Rama's separation is its breadth. Sita's separation is the other end of the shore. Sighs are its turbulent waves and whirlpools. Tears are its foam and turbid waters. Waving of arms is its fishes. Cries of agony are its roars. My dishevelled hair is its moss. Kaikeyi is the mouth of Badaba. My copious tears are its source. Words of the hunchback (Manthara) are the monstrous crocodiles. The cruel boons to Kaikeyi are its shores. Without Rama I cannot cross  this sea of sorrow alive. Ah, what a pity
Though I wish I cannot see Rama together with Lakshmana. Indeed this is very unfortunate. Lamenting thus, king Dasaratha of great reknown fell on the bed, unconscious.
Wailing, Dasaratha fell unconscious. He was doubly grieved due to his yearning for Rama. Rama's mother was seized with fear hearing those lamentations.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends  the fiftyninth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Thereafter Kausalya, trembling as if possessed by an evil spirit and rolling on the floor like one who her senses now and again, said to the charioteer (Sumantra):
Take me where Rama, Sita and Lakshmana are. I do not wish to live even for a moment without them.
'Turn back your chariot immediately and take me to the Dandaka forest. If I do not follow them, I shall enter the world of Yama'.
With folded hands and faltering words choked by his fastflowing tears the charioteer tried to console Kausalya:
Abandon your tears, delusion and despair arising out of sorrow. Rama is going to live in the forest, brushing aside all agony.
Selfcontrolled Lakshmana, aware of his duty, serves Rama in the forest. By this he is securing his next world.
Sita with her mind fixed on Rama is living confidently in that desolate forest without any fear as if it were her home.
I could not see even the slightest depression in Sita as if she was accustomed to staying away from home.
Earlier, just as Sita used to revel in the gardens of the city, so does she now in those desolate forests.
Charming Sita whose face resembles the full Moon, with her mind fixed on Rama, is enjoying even the desolate forest like a child.
Her heart is ever united with Rama, and her life is under his control. Without Rama, even Ayodhya would become a forest for her.
Seeing villages, cities, trees of different kinds and courses of rivers, Sita is enquiring from Rama or Lakshmana about them. She feels as though she is sporting in the pleasuregarden just a krosa from Ayodhya.
Sita did say something about Kaikeyi, but now I do not remember what.
Diverting the context of what he uttered inadvertently relating to Kaikeyi, the charioteer said pleasing words of consolation to Kausalya.
Just like the beams of the Moon, Sita's glow is not affected by the fatigue of the journey or by the speed of the wind or by the scorching heat.
The countenance of Sita with her gentle eloquence resembles a hundredpetalled lotus. She has the luminance of the full Moon that has not wilted.
Her feet, now devoid of lacdye, still look red like lac and shine like the lotus bud.
Casting off her ornaments, the damsel (Sita) is gracefully walking as if dalliant with her tinkling anklets for her love for him (Rama).
Though in the forest, Sita, under the protection of Rama's arms, is afraid of neither elephants nor lions nor tigers.
You need not lament for them or for yourself or for the king. This story of Rama will endure permanently in the world.
They are upholding the sacred promise of their father with cheerful hearts, grief given the goby, steadfastly pursuing the path established by maharsis, subsisting on forest fruits and enjoying the forest life.
Though Sumantra was speaking with befitting words to prevent Kausalya from weeping over her son which had enfeebled her, she did not stop crying, 'O my beloved', 'O my son', 'O Rama'. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtieth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
When Rama, the greatest among those who please the people, he who was conscious of his duty left for the forest. Kausalya, sobbing in bitter anguish, said to her husband:
Your great fame has spread all over the three worlds. People know you as compassionate, generous and sweetspeaking scion of the Raghus.
O Dasaratha, the best among kings, how will your two sons and Sita brought up in great comfort now tolerate the hardships of forest life?
How can the daughter of Mithila (Sita) who in the prime of her life, accustomed to comforts, endure  heat and cold indeed?
How can the largeeyed Sita having enjoyed delicious food mixed with condiments and soup now partake the food prepared with wild grains?
How can the blameless Sita, used to the soft sound of songs and musical instruments hear the frightful roars of lions and other carnivorous animals?
Where will that mightyarmed and powerful Rama, as lofty as Indra's banner, sleep using his ironbarlike arm as pillow?.
When shall I see Rama with his lotushued face, his beautiful locks of hair, breath of lotus fragrance and eyes like blue lotus?
No doubt my heart must be made of thunderbolt, since unable to see Rama it does not split into a thousand pieces.
(O king) It is because of your heartless action, my Rama and my relatives who deserve to enjoy pleasures at this age have been banished and are miserably wandering in wilderness.
Even if Rama returns in the fifteenth year, it is unlikely that Bharata will give up the kingdom and royal treasury (in favour of Rama).
Some first feed their own relatives in shraddha ceremony and thereafter look for the best of brahmins to feed.
The godlike brahmins who are virtuous and learned will not accept the food after others have partaken even if it is ambrosia.
The bulls (best) among the wise brahmins would not like to accept the food after it is tasted by other brahmins, just as bulls dislike their horns being shorn.
O Lord of the world why not the eldest and the most distinguished among the brothers likewise disdain the kingdom enjoyed by the younger brother?
Just as a tiger will not eat the food acquired by another beast, Rama, the tiger (best) among men will not accept the kingdom enjoyed by others.
Havis, sacrificial offerings like ghee, cakes, kusha grass, and sacrificial posts made from khadira wood, once used in the sacrifice cannot be used again.
In the same way Rama will not accept this kingdom enjoyed by others like liquour or soma juice drained of its essence.
Rama, highly determined will not suffer this indignity. If enraged, he can split open even mount Mandara with his sharp arrows.
Out of respect for his father magnanimous Rama is not inclined to kill you. He has not defied the anger, the Sun, the Moon and the sky looking wonderful with stars can be pulled down. He will not even shake or break the earth surrounded by hundreds of mountains.
A powerful tiger will not allow its tail to be twisted. In the same way Rama also will not tolerate an insult of this sort.
Even if all the worlds were to unite and fight against him, he will not fear. This righteous Rama will reestablish justice in this unrighteous world.
Valiant and mightyarmed Rama, with his golden shafts can annihilate all living beings and oceans like at the time of  deluge everything is consumed in fire.
Such Rama, the best among men, powerful like a lion, with eyes fierce like that of a bull has been destroyed by his own father just as the big fish destroys its own offsprings.
You have banished your son who is devoted to righteousness. Is it in accordance with the scriptures and the eternal tradition followed by the twiceborn?
O king for a woman the first refuge is the husband, the second her son, the third her relatives and there is no fourth alternative in this world.
Forced to hear the harsh words of angry Kausalya, the king, deeply distressed, was absorbed in sad thought.
The king (Dasaratha) tormentor of enemies, for a while, lost his consciousness, his senses bewildered. After a long time he regained his senses.
When he regained his senses, the king heaved deep, hot sighs. Seeing Kausalya by his side he relapsed into a state of anxiety.
While he was thus reflecting on a sinful act he had inadvertently comitted long ago, the act of discharging an arrow that could hit its target following the sound, flashed in his mind.
The great king, the lord with a broken heart started regretting deeply about both the grievous acts he had committed previously (one is shooting at the son of a sage and the other, banishing Rama).
Consumed by the double sorrow, the king trembling, with head down and folding his hands said to Kausalya in order to appease her:
O Kausalya I entreat you with folded palms. Be merciful. Forever affectionate, you are not cruel even towards your enemies.
O Devi for women who have regard for righteousness, a husband, whether virtuous or not, is a god incarnate.
You always adhere to righteousness. You have seen both the extremes (good and bad) of this world. Athough you yourself are in grief it does not behove you to speak unpleasant words to one who is suffering from a greater grief.
Kausalya heard the pitiable words uttered by the king who was in a wretched condition. She shed tears like a water channel discharging fresh rainwater.
Frightened Kausalya, weeping and raising her palms folded like lotus on to her head,  and charged with emotions said with stumbling syllables:
O lord, by falling on the ground at your feet, bowing my head I beg of you to be pleased. By your act of beseeching me, I have been badly hurt. I do deserve to be pardoned.
O heroic one a woman, who is entreated by her sagacious and praiseworthy husband, loses both the worlds.
O righteous one I know the path of dharma. I also know that you are a truthful. Afflicted with grief on account of my son, I spoke somewhat harshly.
Grief destroys fortitude. Grief destroys knowledge of the scriptures, grief destroys  everything. There is no enemy equal to grief.
One can endure an unexpected blow from the enemy's hand but to endure unexpected  grief, however slight it may be, is impossible.
O heroic one even learned ascetics who are well versed in ethics and scriptures and who are free from doubts with regard to dharma and artha, are deluded by grief.
This is the fifth night of Rama's exile, but it is like five years to me whose joy has been destroyed by sorrow.
As I think of Rama, my heart swells with sorrow just as the ocean rises with rushing rivers.
While Kausalya was speaking these hearttouching words, the rays of the Sun began to fade and the night fell.
Waking up in a moment tormented with grief, the king began to ponder once again.
Indralike Dasaratha due to banishment of Rama and Lakshmana, was besieged by a great calamity like the Sun enveloped by demonic dark at the time of eclipse.
After Rama had left along with his wife the king of Kosala (Dasaratha) recollected his former evil deed and wanted to narrate it to the darkeyed Kausalya.
After the banishment of Rama the king spent the sixth night, recalling the evil deed done by him in the past.
King Dasaratha distressed by the separation from his son, pondered over his past misdeed, and said to helpless Kausalya, who was equally grieving over the separation from Rama:
O gentle auspicious lady a man has to reap the fruit of his action, good or evil.
He who, at the commencement of any action, does not foresee the good or evil consequences of his action in considered a child.
If some one cuts down mango trees and plants palasa trees and waters them will repent when he sees only flowers while he expects fruit.
Without foreseeing the fruits of his action, he who runs after action only will regret at the time of fruition like the one who waters the palasa tree.
So I have cut the mango trees and watered palasa trees. In utter foolishness, I have banished Rama at the time of fruition and  regretting later.
O Kausalya in my youth I was a great archer who could hit the target by its sound. As such I committed this sin.
Just as a boy consumes poison out of delusion, O Devi, this sorrow has befallen me as a result of my own action.
Like some one who is deluded by palasa trees I too did not realise the consequences of shooting the target following the direction of the sound.
O Kausalya, you were not married then. I was prince regent. The rainy season that inflames passion and pride had just set in.
Having sucked the waters of the earth and scorching the world with its rays, the Sun had entered the frightful southern quarter ranged by departed souls.
At that time the heat subsided, glistening clouds appeared. The frogs, geese and peacocks began to rejoice.
The birds with their plummage moistened  as if they had dipped in water reached with great difficulty the tops of the trees which were shaken by the wind and rain.
Engulfed by torrents of rain that continued to fall ceaselessly, the mountain visited by intoxicated antelopes looked like a mass of water.
Although pure, the rapidly flowing water from the mountains mixed with the minerals in the soil turned white and red in colour and flowed like a serpent.
The streams that were pure, mixed with red soil flowed red, deviating from their natural course.
In that highly delightful season, wishing to go hunting I, armed with bow and arrows, rode my chariot towards  river Sarayu.
And there, with no control over my senses, I hid  in a lonely place with my bow in readiness intending to shoot a buffalo or an elephant or any other wild animal that might come to the spot for drinking water in the night.
Hiding and waiting there, following the sounds of animals I killed two animals that had reached the bank of the river.
Then at a place that was out of the range of my sight in darkness I heard the sound of a pitcher being filled with water which resembled the sound of an elephant.
Wishing to kill the elephant, I seized my arrow glowing like a venomous snake and aimed it towards the sound.
Then I discharged a sharp shaft like a venomous serpent. In the morning twilight I saw that the shaft had hit the vital part of the body of a forest dweller and his cry of 'Alas', was clearly heard as he fell in the water.
When the arrow hit him, a man's voice was heard saying, 'How can an arrow be discharged at a person like me who is an ascetic?'
'I have come to this lonely spot of the river to take water. Who has hit me with this arrow? What (harm) have I done to any one?'
'Renouncing violence I live the life of an ascetic on forest produce. Why should any one kill me with a weapon?
'Who wants to kill me who lives like an ascetic with matted hair and wearing bark or the skin of an antelope? What harm have I done to him?
'Whoever it is, he has committed only a mischievous and senseless act. This sin like a disciple sleeping on the bed of his preceptor none will approve of.
'I do not regret so much about the loss of my own life as  about my mother and father after I am dead.
'So long I have been supporting this aged couple. After I am dead, how will they live?
'My aged parents along with me are killed by a single arrow. Who is that malicious knave  who has slain us?
On hearing the piteous voice the bow and arrow dropped from my (trembling) hands since I was keen on following the righteous path.
Having heard his pathetic lamentations at night, I was extremely frightened by the force of grief and stood bewildered.
With dissipated energy and intensely troubled mind, I reached the bank of river Sarayu and there I saw the ascetic lying struck by the arrow and with scattered locks of hair. The water pitcher was thrown away and his body smeared with blood and dust as he lay on the ground.
I was mentally stricken and frightened. He looked up as if buring me with the energy of his eyes. Then he uttered the words 'A cruel act'
'O king you have struck me when I was trying to carry water to my parents. I am a forestdweller. What harm have I done to you?
'By striking at the vital part of my body with one arrow, you have killed both my aged and blind mother and father too.
'How will the two who are frail, thirsty and blind wait for me for long controlling their thirst with great difficulty with the expectation (that I would fetch them water)?
'My father does not know that I am lying on the ground. It is true that there is no reward either for asceticism or for scriptural knowledge.
'What can my weak father who has no strength to walk do, even if he knows about it? Like a tree which cannot protect another which is being severed, he is helpless.
O scion of the Raghus (Dasaratha) Go at once and inform my father, lest in anger he should burn you like ignited fire consuming the forest.
'O king, this footpath leads to my father's hermitage. Go and beg his forgiveness so that he may not curse you out of anger.
'Gently remove the arrow from my body, O king the sharp arrow is piercing deep into my vital just like the current of the river hits its elevated bank'.
The thought of removing the arrow kept me pondering. If not removed, it will be painful, and if removed, he will die.
The son of the ascetic noticed my anguish and seeing me thus distressed, wretched and afflicted with sorrow, said:
Suffering from excruciating pain, sinking with his limbs twisting and writhing and plunging into death and destruction, with intense agony he uttered the following words with great difficulty:
'I am now calm. I bear my pain with patience. Remove the fear from your mind that you have committed a sin by slaying a brahmin.
'O king Dasaratha, lord of the land, I am not a brahmin. Feel no sense of guilt in your mind. I was born of a sudra mother and a vaisya father.
Grieving for having unfairly killed the great sage the rightenous descendant of the Raghus (Dasaratha) coutinued to tell Kausalya about it:
Having committed the sin unwittingly, I was greatly agitated. I reflected in my mind as to how to atone for this great sin.
Holding the pot filled with clean water I reached the hermitage following the path as directed.
There I found his weak, blind, old parents. With no supporter, they looked like birds with clipped wings. They sat there helplessly like orphans and passively talking about their son, their only hope that I have deprived them of.
Smitten with grief and my heart throbbing with fear I reached the hermitage and my sorrow became manifold.
Hearing the sound of my footsteps, the sage said 'O son why have you delayed? Bring me some water quickly'.
'O Dear child, whatever be the reason, you have been sporting in the water so long, come at once to the hermitage. Your mother is anxious.
'O Child, O Son if your mother or I have done anything disagreeable, do not take it to heart, for you are an ascetic.
'You are a support to the supportless, eyes to the blind, you are our very vital life. Why don't you speak to us'?
As I saw him, my heart was filled with terror and I stammered as I spoke in garbled sentences.
After a lot of effort, with great fear controlling my thoughts and the power of speech, I related to him the calamity that had befallen his son.
O magnanimous sage I am a kshatriya known as Dasaratha. I am not your son. A pathetic incident has been caused by my own action, condemnable by the virtuous.
Wishing to hunt a wild elephant coming down to the water hole for drinking, I went  to the bank of Sarayu, bow in hand, O revered sage
There I heard the sound of a pot being filled with water and mistaking it to be an elephant's, shot an arrow.
Thereafter I reached the river bank  and beheld an ascetic with an arrow pierced in his chest. He was lying on the ground, his life ebbing away.
O venerable one I released an arrow towards the water aiming at the sound intending to kill an elephant but it hit your son.
Then I approached him. He was suffering from excruciating pain. I pulled out at his word the arrow from his chest.
Grieving for both of you and crying you are blind he died as soon as the arrow was pulled out.
Your son has been killed by me due to my ignorance. Since this has happened, may  the ascetic be pleased to command me on the next course of action.
The venerable sage heard my cruel words about the sinful act and was not able to seriously react. (He was stunned).
The griefstricken, glorious ascetic with his face filled with tears, heaving deep sighs  broke down with grief and spoke to me as I was standing with folded palms.
'O king, hadn't you yourself broken this inauspicious news, your head would have split into a hundred thousand pieces right now.
'If a kshatriya kills any one knowingly, particularly when in vanaprastha (third stage) this sin can displace even Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt from his position, O king.
'If any one deliberately discharges a weapon upon an ascetic observing austerities or on him who expounds the Vedas, his head will split into seven pieces.
'Since you have done this unwittingly you are still alive. If it had been otherwise, your Ikshvaku race itself would have been exterminated, what to speak of you
'O king take us to that place. We wish to  have the last look at him, at his garment of antelope skin in disarray, his body spattered with blood, lying on the ground unconscious under the sway of the lord of death'. Thus the sage said to me.
Thereupon, I took both of them all by myself to that spot and made the grieving ascetics touch the body of their son.
Both the ascetics stroking their son's body and collapsed upon it. And the father said:
'O child why are you not greeting us today nor speaking? Why are you lying on the ground? Are you angry with us?
'O righteous son if I am no longer dear to you, (at least) look at your mother. O tender child, why are you not embracing me? Speak.
'From whom shall I hear the sweet recitation of scriptures or other texts, delightful to my heart in the last watch of the night?
'O son I am tortured with sorrow and fear. Who will serve me from now on after the ablution and the morning worship of Sandhya, followed by oblations to the sacrificial fire?
'I am incapable of doing any work, I am unable to procure anything (to meet my needs. now). I have no guide (to help me walk my way). Who will feed me like a welcome guest with tubers and fruits?
'O son how can I support your wretched and pitiable mother, who is blind, old and yearning for her son?
'My dear son, stay with me, do not go (now) to the abode of Yama, (lord of death). Tomorrow accompanied by me and your mother you may
'There seeing Yama, (lord of death), I shall say O Lord of Justice forgive me. Let this boy continue to maintain his parents.
'That lord of justice, who is highly renowned, righteous and the guardian of the worlds will grant me one unfailing boon of protection from fear.
'O sinless son, you are killed by a person of sinful deeds. On this truth, quickly go to those worlds which are attained by those valiant heroes.
'You will attain, my son, the same supreme state achieved by Sagara, Saibya, Dilipa, Janamejaya, Nahusha and Dundumara.
'You, my son, shall attain that supreme state obtained by those who are virtuous, who study the Vedas and practise asceticism.You shall attain the state merited by those bestowers of land as charity, who kindle the sacred fires, who are monoganists, who offer a thousand cows in charity, who nurture the venerable and who willingly lay down their bodies.
'He who has killed you will alone attain that undesirable state, a member of our family will not.'
In this way the ascetic piteously wailed again and again. Thereafter, he with his wife set about to perform the funeral obsequies of their son.
The virtuous son of that ascetic assumed a celestial form through the merit of his good deeds and ascended heaven at once with Indra.
The ascetic in the company of Indra consoling the aged couple for a brief moment said:
'I have attained this supreme state by virtue of the service rendered to you. You will also attain my state soon.'
The sage's son with his senses under control said this while ascending heaven on a beautiful, celestial, aerial chariot.
The radiant ascetic along with his wife hurriedly completed the funeral libations and said to me standing with folded palms:
'Kill me, O king with the same arrow by which you rendered me childless. Death holds no pain for me.
'Though you have killed my purehearted son unintentionally, I will pronounce a disastrous and dreadful curse on you.
'Just as I am now suffering from grief caused by my son's death, you, O king, shall die from the sorrow on account of (separation from) your son.
'Since you, O lord of men, you have killed an ascetic unaware, as kshatriya the sin of slaying a brahmin will not accrue to you immediately.
'Just like the merits of alms come to the giver, you are going to face very soon a dreadful situation causing the end of your life.'
Having thus cursed me, the couple piteously lamenting for a long time, laid themselves down on the funeral pyre  and went to heaven.
While reflecting about it now, O Devi (Kausalya) I recollect this sin committed by me unintentionally, with childish pranks while practising the art of hitting a target by its sound.
Just as a man eating forbidden food and drink falls sick, so have I fallen prey to grief, because of my sin, O Devi
O gentle lady, the words of that noble ascetic have come true today. Hence I am now going to give up my life.
O Kausalya, I cannot see you with my eyes. Touch me gently, said the frightened Dasaratha, Lord of the earth, to his wife weeping.
Whatever I have done to the scion of the Raghu family (Rama) is befitting me, O Devi. And whatever he has done in respect of me is also worthy of him.
Which clearsighted man in this world, will abandon his son even if he is of evil conduct? Which son will not get angry with his father when he is banished?
Before I die, will Rama touch me once or will he come to me? After reaching the abode of Yama men cannot see their relations.
O Kausalya, I am unable to see you. My memory is failing and the messengers of Yama are hastening me.
Can there be a greater sorrow than that at the last moment of my life I am unable to see my righteous and truthful son, Rama?
My grief in the absence of Rama of peerless deeds is drying up my life as heat dries up small pools of water.
Those who will behold Rama's countenance adorned with auspicious earrings on his return in the fifteenth year are gods not men.
Blessed are they who will behold Rama's countenance resembling the Moon, lord of the stars with eyes like lotus petals graceful eyebrows, even teeth and a nose.
Fortunate indeed are the men who will behold my son's fragrant countenance camparable to the autmnal Moon and the fullblown lotus.
Lucky men will behold Rama return to Ayodhya after the completion of his exile, like the planet Venus moving forward on its orbit.
O Kausalya, my heart, it appears is sinking and on account of delusion I am not able to feel the sense objects like sound touch and taste together.
With the loss of my mental faculty, all the sense organs are giving way, like the rays of the lamp giving way together when the oil is exhausted.
This selfcreated grief is rapidly destroying me like the bank of a river eroded by its swift current, leaving me helpless and insensible.
Ah, mightyarmed Rama, destroyer of my agonies, Ah, the delight of your father, Ah, my protector, Ah, my son, where have you gone?.
Ah, Kausalya, Ah, pitiable Sumitra, Ah, cruel Kaikeyi, my enemy and defiler of my race, I am going to die.
King Dasaratha, thus crying in distress in the presence of Rama's mother and  Sumitra reached the end of his life.
King Dasaratha, a man of noble vision and lord of men, anguished by the exile of his son, kept pitiably muttering till past midnight  until tormented by an intense agony he breathed his last.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुष्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfourth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Then on the following day (unaware of Dasaratha's death) panegyrists uttering benedictions, highly accomplished bards and genealogists proficient in reciting auspicious words, singers versed in musical science reached the palace one after another eulogising the king's glory.
The songs of those who were eulogising the king and uttering benedictions at high pitch pervaded the entire palace.
While the bards sang the praise of the king, those who praise clapping their palms  clapped, citing the wonderful deeds of Dasaratha.
The birds perched on the branches and some in cages awoke and began to twitter all over the palace.
The sacred songs of bards and panegyrists, notes of veena, chantings of metrical hymns and benedictory verses filled the palace.
Thereafter, as usual, men observing purificatory practices and skilled in royal service  assembled along with women and eunuchs.
The bathattendants brought water mixed with yellow sandal paste in golden vessels at appropriate times in accordance with tradition.
Also, a group of women mostly young maidens brought auspicious unguents, articles gratifying the senses and those necessary accessories for completion of bathing process.
All the articles brought for the king (for his bath) were presentable and as per tradition. In quality they were excellent and auspicious.
All the highly enthusiastic attendants waited for the king till sunrise. Unable to see the king  they doubted about what had happened
The women who usually attend to the bed (maids who do the bed in the morning) of Dasaratha (king of Kosala) without any restrictions, approached the king and began waking him up.
Conducting themselves agreeably with restraint and obedience,  the women touched the bed of Dasaratha but did not perceive any sign of life.
Those women knowledgeable in ascertaining the nature of sleep based on the actions, movements, etc. were apprehensive whether the king was  alive or not. Trembling severely  they seemed like the tips of reeds that  stand against the current.
Having seen the king more closely, those women who were apprehensive till then, became certain of the inevitable.
Overpowered by grief on account of separation from their sons, Sumitra and Kausalya were fast asleep and did not wake up as if they were possessed by death.
Kausalya, with her face dull and pallid, sank down, her limbs contracted. She looked lustreless like stars enveloped in darkness.
There lay Sumitra next to Kausalya by the side of the king. Queen Kausalya's face was dull, drooping  down on account of shedding tears of sorrow.
Having seen the two auspicious queens asleep, the women in the inner apartment thought the king died in his sleep.
Then those women bewailed bitterly and loudly in distress like female elephants in the forest when their leader has fallen out of the herd.
Hearing the lamentations of the women suddenly Kausalya and Sumitra woke up from sleep, their senses recovered.
Kausalya and Sumitra looked at the king, touched his body, cried aloud, 'Ah, lord' and collapsed on the floor.
Kausalya, daughter of the lord of Kosala, lay on the ground writhing in pain, coated  with dust, and devoid of brightness like a star without radiance fallen from the sky.
Dasaratha with his body lying still, all the women looked at Kausalya fallen down on the floor like a slain female elephant.
Then all the wives of the king led by Kaikeyi,  burning with grief and weeping, lost their senses and fell down.
The wailings of the women grew louder and louder until the whole palace reverberated with their lamentations.
On the demise of Dasaratha, joy instantly vanished. The palace was thronged with anxious people who were exceedingly bewildered and frightened. The royal family was anguished with distress. The palace was filled all over with the tumult of cries of agony. And it looked miserable with grief.
Realising that the great and illustrious king, Dasaratha, had passed away, his wives gathered around him, weeping piteously and bitterly and holding one another's hands  bewailed like orphans.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfifth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
On seeing the king who ascended the heaven just as a blazing fire suddenly extinguishes, or like the ocean emptied of water or the Sun bereft of splendour Kausalya raised the head of the king on to her lap, her eyes filled with tears and body shrunk in sorrow, looked at Kaikeyi and said:
O cruel one O perverse wretch, O Kaikeyi, your wishes have been fulfilled. You have forsaken the king, that was your only objective. (Now) enjoy the kingdom alone without any obstacles on your way.
Rama has gone away leaving me. My lord has ascended the heaven, traversing the wrong road. With my wellwishers gone, I do not want to live.
Which woman wishes to live, leaving her godlike husband, except Kaikeyi who has given up her sense of duty?
Like a greedy man who eats the (poisonous) kimpaka fruit without realising the defects of the fruit, Kaikeyi has destroyed the Raghu race on account of the hunchback (Manthara).
Hearing the unrighteous action ordered by the king in banishing Rama and his wife  king Janaka will suffer great agony like me.
That virtuous Rama of lotuspetaleyes has left this place for good, and does not know that I am without a protector, being a widow now.
In the same way Sita, daughter of the king of Videha, who does not deserve hardships will be in deep agony.
Hearing the ghastly sounds of animals and birds, Sita will surely get frightened and take shelter in Rama.
Old and sonless Janaka, constantly thinking of Sita and overpowered with grief will surely give up his life.
As his faithful wife, I shall enter the fire by clasping this (Dasaratha's) body and go to  death today itself
The servants led away that unfortunate Kausalya who was lamenting in great anguish  embracing the body of Dasaratha.
The counsellors, instructed (by Vasistha and others), placed the king's body in an oil tub with the understanding that the funeral rites were to be performed hereafter.
The counsellors who were acquainted with all such matters (relating to the king's funeral) were unwilling to perform the obsequies in the absence of any of the king's sons. Meanwhile, they kept watch over the deadbody of the king.
On seeing the king's body laid in the oil vat by the counsellors, the women cried  Alas, the king is dead.
With tears flowing down their faces, piteously raising their arms, groaning in their burning grief, the women lamented helplessly.
When we were already deprived of Rama who was always pleasing and truthful, alas, o great king, why did you leave us?
A woman of evil intentions, Kaikeyi, at first separated us from Rama. Now she deprived us of our husband. How can we live with one who is a slayer of her husband?
Rama, who was always our and your selfpossessed master and protector has gone to the forest, indeed, abandoning royal wealth.
Without you and without the heroic Rama, how can we live overwhelmed with grief and enduring the abuses of Kaikeyi?
Why will not Kaikeyi who has abandoned the king, valiant Rama and Lakshmana along with Sita cast aside others?
The excellent wives of Dasaratha, overwhelmed with profound grief and tears, are  lying unconcious on the floor.
Like night without the Moon, like a woman forsaken by her husband, this city of Ayodhya without that magnanimous king has lost its earlier splendour.
With the people of Ayodhya shedding tears, the housewives crying, in anguish, 'alas alas' the courtyards houses and squares of the roads deserted, the city has lost its earlier brilliance.
When king Dasaratha ascended to heaven due to grief over his son and when his wives were lying on the ground, the Sun ceased his journey and the night favourable to creatures of darkness suddenly set in.
The wellwishers who asembled, unwilling to ignite the funeral pyre of the king in the absence of any one of his sons laid the king's deadbody in that oil trough in an unexpected manner.
The city, bereft of illustrious Dasaratha was filled with people sobbing in the courtyards in front of their houses and in the squares in between. That city of Ayodhya bereft of brightness, appeared like the day without the Sun and the night without constellations of stars.
After the demise of the king, men and women in the city assembled in groups and denounced the mother of Bharata. Extremely distressed, they had no peace of mind. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षट्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtysixth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The night stretched interminably in Ayodhya, which was filled with sobbing people  rendered cheerless by their lamentations.
When the night finally ended and after the sunrise next day, the brahmins who perform royal investiture having been called and reached the assembly hall.
Markandeya, Maudgalya, Kasyapa, Katyayana, Gautama, Jabali of great renown   accompanied by ministers and brahmins approached Vasistha, the chief  priest of the king and expressed different opinions (on the investiture).
While king Dasaratha died on account of grief over (separation from) his son and rejoined the five elements, the sorrowful night seemed like a hundred years for us. (commented the assembly of ministers).
The great king has attained heaven, Rama has taken refuge in the forest and brilliant Lakshmana has also gone with Rama.
Bharata and Satrughna, destroyers of enemies, are at the beautiful city of Rajagriha in the Kekaya kingdom, the palace of their maternal grandfather's palace.
Therefore, let someone from the race of Ikshvakus be appointed king right now.  since without a king, the country will be destroyed.
In a country without a king, thunderous clouds garlanded by lightning would no longer water the earth with celestial showers.
Where there is no king, even a handful of seeds will not be sown (will not sprout). In a kingless kingdom, a son or a wife will not obey the father (head of the family).
In a kingdom without a king wealth cannot be preserved, no wife would like to stay (with her husband). There is one more cause for a great peril, that is, there is no place for truth in a country (where there is no king).
In a country where there is no king, no assemblies are convened by pleasure seeking people, nor do they build delightful gardens or sacred edifices.
In a country without a king, selfcontrolled brahmins in charge of sacrificial ceremonies, wellversed in the study of Vedas and strict followers of  austerity will not function.
In a country without a king wealthy brahmins, who have performed great sacrifices, do not offer abundance of gifts to the officiating priests.
In a country without a king, celebrations of associations promoting the welfare of the country, actors and dancers in large numbers do not prosper.
Where there is no king, those engaged in lawsuits will not succeed and those who are accustomed to storytelling will not entertain those who love to listen to stories.
In a country without a king, young ladies adorned with golden ornaments no longer meet in the evening at the pleasure garden for sporting.
In a country without a king, pleasureseeking men will not drive in the woods on swiftmoving chariots with women.
In a country without a king, wealthy people who live on farming and raising cattle cannot sleep safely in their homes with doors wide open.
In a country without a king, young elephants of sixty years of age, their tusks adorned with bells no longer wander about on the highways.
In a country without a king, the sounds of the ceaseless discharge of arrows and practice of weapons, the clappings of the cord on the skin shield of shooters throwing the arrows are no longer heard.
In a country without a king merchants travelling long distances with several kinds of saleable goods cannot go safely on their way.
In a country where there is no king, an ascetic who (normally) moves alone, selfcontrolled and contemplating on the higher self no longer wanders or rests in the inn.
In a country without a king, there is no security of possessions and the army cannot withstand the  enemy in a battle.
In a country without a king, welldressed men are no longer enthusiastic to drive on excellent horses and on chariots.
In a country with no king people proficient in scriptures do not withdraw to the forests and (recreational) gardens for debates (on scriptures).
In a country where there is no king, people who are disciplined in spiritual practices do not offer garlands of flowers, sweetmeats and alms while worshipping gods.
In a country where there is no king, the princes, anointed with sandal paste and agaru, no longer look graceful like blosoming trees in spring time.
(The kingdom without a king) is like rivers without water, forests without vegetation and  cows without cowherds.
In a country where there is no king, no one can own anything and, like fish, people devour one another ceaselessly.
Atheists, who disregard the bounds of morality and live freely dispelling doubts will tend to follow virtuous path out of fear when subjected to royal punishment.
The king is the source for protecting the truth and morality of a country like the eye which perpetually watches the welfare of the body.
The king is the protector of truth and righteousness, of men of good families. He is father, and mother. He alone renders welfare of the people.
Hence, the king with his excellent conduct surpasses mighty Yama, Vaisravana, Indra and Varuna.
If the king did not show the distinction between the good and evil actions, this world would have been enveloped by darkness. Nothing could have been seen. How great (is the king)?
Even while the great king was alive, we never defied your word like the ocean which does not overstep its shore.
O Vasistha, the best of brahmins, considering all that has happened and knowing that a kingdom without a king is like a forest, you may consecrate a generous son from  the Ikshvaku race as our king.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyseventh sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Having listened to their (the counsellors') words, Vasistha replied to the host of friends and counsellors of the king  and to all the brahmins:
Bharata on whom the kingdom has been conferred is living comfortably in his maternal uncle's house. Let swift messengers go quickly  on speeding horses and bring back the valiant brothers, Bharata and Satrughna. What is there to deliberate for us in this matter?
Let the messengers go, said all of them to Vasistha. On hearing this, Vasistha  replied again.
Calling Siddhartha, Vijaya, Jayanta, Asoka and Nandana, Vasistha said, All of you  listen to what is required to be done (by you).
Go at once from here on swift horses to the city of Rajagrha and concealing signs of grief, convey these words to Bharata as my command:
The family priest and all the counsellors  wish your welfare. You must return in haste. There is an urgent task required to be done by you.
All of you go there and do not communicate (to Bharata) about the exile of Rama or the demise of his father and the disaster that has befallen the Raghus.
Take with you silk garments and precious ornaments for the king of Kekaya and Bharata and depart at once.
The messengers set to depart to Kekaya kingdom, carrying with them the necessaries for their journey went to their respective homes mounted on  excellent horses.
Having completed the rest of the arrangements for the journey and permitted by  Vasistha, the messengers left.
The messengers proceeded in westerly direction for some distance and then crossed the southern end of the Aparatala mountain. Thereafter, they travelled northward along the bank of Malini that flows in between Aparatala and Pralamba mountains.
The messengers crossed Ganga at Hastinapura, and went in the westerly direction through the middle of Kurujangala and reached the country of Panchala. Beholding lakes full of water and rivers of pellucid waters there, they travelled fast with a view to fulfilling their mission.
The messengers crossed the divine Saradanda of calm waters frequented by fowls of various speices and thronged with people. And proceeded speedily.
They reached a divine tree (of great powers) known as Satyopayachana tree and having gone round and paid homage they entered the Kulinga city.
From there they reached a village known as Abhikala and crossed the sacred Ikshumati flowing from Bodhibhavana mountain. This region was enjoyed by fathers and forefathers of Dasaratha.
There they saw the brahmins versed in the Vedas and drank water with cupped  palms. Then they continued their journey through the middle of Bahlika country, and  reached Sudama mountain.
Beholding the footprints of Visnu (on Sudama mountain), and seeing Vipasa, and Salmali rivers, trees, streams, deep wells, ponds, pools, large tanks, different kinds of lions, tigers and elephants, they travelled a long distance with the intention of fulfilling the command of their master.
After a prolonged journey the messengers with their tired horses soon reached Girivraja, the (capital city of Kekaya kingdom) best of cities.
To please their master (sage Vasistha)  and to preserve the royal dynasty and also to protect the honour of the (race and people), the messengers soon reached their destination by night without any negligence of their duty.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends  the sixtyeighth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
On the very night the messengers were entering the city, Bharata had a distressing dream.
The son of the king of kings (Bharata) felt extremely troubled hen he had an  unpleasant dream at dawn.
Observing him griefstricken his peers who always spoke pleasant words, engaged him in a variety of ways in the assembly in order to divert him.
In order to provide mental peace to Bharata, some played stringed instruments while some enacted dramatic scenes, some danced and cracked various kinds of jokes.
The magnanimous Bharata born in the race of Raghus, was not delighted by the conversations and jokes and soothing words of his friends.
Addressing Bharata amidst his companions some one close among them said O friend why are you dejected in spite of being in the company of friends.
Addressing his companion who was speaking thus, Bharata replied, saying Listen to the reason this desolation has overtaken me:
In my dream I saw my father looking pale, with dishevelled hair, his body filled with filth falling from the peak of a mountain into a pool of cow  dung.
I saw my father floating in that pool of cow  dung, drinking oil with cupped palms and  bursting into laughter again and again.
Thereafter I beheld him eating rice cooked with sesame seeds, his body besmeared with oil plunging again and again into it (the pool).
In that dream I beheld the sea being dried up and the Moon fallen onto the ground. I saw the earth as though enveloped by darkness and obscured, the tusk of an  elephant worthy of a ride by the monarch broken into pieces, a blazing fire  extinguished suddenly, the earth split open, various trees dried up and mountains crumbled and covered with smoke.
In the dream, I beheld my father clad in black clothes and resting on a seat made of iron and the women in dark and brownish complexion laughing at him.
Thereafter, I beheld that virtuous monarch bedecked with garlands made of red flowers and his body bedaubed with red sandalpaste, hurrying off southward on a chariot yoked with asses.
Finally I beheld a demoness attired in red clothes with an ugly appearance, dragging the king away as if mocking at him.
I had such a frightful dream last night. Either I, Rama, the king or Lakshmana might  die.
If one beholds in a dream a person setting out on a carriage yoked to asses, the wreath of smoke ascending from his funeral pyre will be seen soon.
So it is for this reason that I am desolate and cannot respond well to your conversation. It appears as if my throat is getting parched up and my mind is illdisposed.
I do not see any reason for apprehension but I experience only fear. My voice has degenerated. My appearance looks haggard. Without any reason whatsoever I detest myself.
On observing the course of this nightmare, with all those images formerly unconceived and having thought of the king's incomprehensible presence, a great fear that has gripped my heart does not leave me.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyninth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki
While Bharata was relating his dream, the mounted messengers (from Ayodhya) with their weary horses entered the lovely city of Rajagriha  surrounded by an impassable moat. There they met the king of Kekaya country and his son, Yuddhajit and were received with honour. Touching the feet of the king with reverence, they  said to Bharata:
The family priest (Vasistha) and all the counsellors have enquired about your welfare. You must return immediately. There is an urgent matter to be attended by you.
Oh largeeyed one (Bharata) you are asked to take these excellent raiments and precious ornaments and bestow them on your maternal uncle (said the messengers).
O prince these gifts worth twenty crore are intended for the king and the rest of the gifts worth ten crore for your maternal uncle.
Affectionate towards his relatives and friends, Bharata received all those gifts and in return honoured those messengers with things they liked, asking them:
I hope my father, Dasaratha is doing well and revered Rama and Lakshmana are in good health
(I hope) Kausalya mother of the sagacious Rama the venerable lady devoted to righteousness one who knows the ways of righteousness and observes the prescribed code of conduct, is keeping sound  health.
I hope my mother Sumitra (the middle one) who is familiar with the ways of righteousness, the mother of valiant Lakshmana and Satrughna, is enjoying good health.
And what about my mother Kaikeyi, ever intent on her own wellbeing, wrathful, irascible and proud of her intelligence? Is she maintaining sound health?
Having listened to the words of that magnanimous Bharata, those messengers addressed him  gracefully with these words.
O tiger among men (Bharata) those of whose welfare you are enquiring are all doing well. May the goddess of wealth and prosperity await you and let your chariot be yoked.
Having thus been addressed, Bharata said to the messengers. Let me seek the permission of the great king of Kekaya to leave and say goodbye, informing him that the messengers are hastening me up.
Having addressed the messengers who were pressing him to leave (for Ayodhya) Bharata said to his maternal grandfather:
O king, urged by these messengers I wish to go to my father. I shall come back again (from Ayodhya) whenever you  remember me.
Then the  king of Kekaya, the maternal grandfather of Bharata, having heard the words of the scion of the Raghu dynasty (Bharata), kissed him on his forehead and spoke these auspicious words:
You may go, my child I permit you to leave. Kaikeyi has a worthy son in you. O slayer of enemies convey my best wishes to your mother and father.
My child, convey my best wishes, too, to your family priest Vasistha and other illustrious brahmins and also to those two great bowmen (Rama and Lakshmana).
The king of Kekaya felicitated Bharata, out of affection and bestowed on him wellbred elephants, manycoloured blankets, antelope skins and riches.
King of Kekaya generously gave to the son of Kaikeyi (Bharata) in his honour two thousand gold coins and  sixteen hundred horses.
Similarly his maternal uncle Ashwapati quickly presented him amenable, trustworthy and virtuous counsellors as companions on his return journey.
His maternal uncle gave him the wealth of goodlooking elephants born in Iravata and Indrasira mountains and swiftmoving and welltrained asses which can be yoked easily. He gave riches too.
He also gave him a gift of wellraised dogs of the inner apartment hugebodied with the strength and courage of tigers who used their fangs as weapons.
All the wealth given by the king of Kekaya did not delight Bharata, son of Kaikeyi who was in a hurry to depart for Ayodhya.
Then his heart was filled with extreme anxiety due to the haste of the messengers to depart and also due to the dream he had.
Prosperous Bharata on leaving his residence, passed through incomparable royal highway thronged with men, elephants and horses.
Then the nobleminded, prosperous Bharata, on leaving the  highway, saw  the inner apartment of the king which he entered unhindered.
Thus having taken leave of his maternal grandfather and uncle Yuddhajit, Bharata accompanied by Satrughna boarded the chariot and went along.
And the servants harnessing more than a hundred chariots of wellrounded wheels and also camels, oxen and horses followed Bharata who started off.
Under the protection of the army, the illustrious Bharata who was devoid of enemies, accompanied by ministers who were comparable to him and Satrughna, departed from his venerable grandfather's house like a siddha leaving the regions of Indra.      इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventieth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Not finding his father in his abode, Bharata went to see his mother in her apartment.
On seeing her son, who was sent away, presently arriving, the delighted Kaikeyi sprang up from her golden seat.
On entering home the righteous Bharata found it devoid of cheer and touched the auspicious feet of his mother (with reverence).
Kaikeyi, gave her illustrious son Bharata a hug, kissed him on his forehead, made him rest on her lap and began her query.
How many nights have you spent (on the way) since you left your noble grandfather's residence? Hasn't the hurried journey (over such a long distance) on the chariot left you exhausted?
My son are your revered grandfather and your maternal uncle Yudhajit doing well? Did you have a pleasant time during the sojourn? You should tell me all this.
Thus asked lovingly by his mother Kaikeyi, the lotuseyed Bharata, the king's delight  narrated everything to her.
This is the seventh night since I left my noble grandsire's residence. My mother's father, king of Kekaya and my maternal uncle Yudhajit are doing well.
The (horses carrying) the wealth including the gems which the king (of Kekaya), the subduer of enemies had bestowed on me were exhausted on the way. Therefore I have come in advance.
Urged upon by the messengers carrying out the orders of the king, I have come. You, O mother, should answer the questions. I wish to ask you.
Your goldbedecked couch, worthy of resting lies empty. None of the attendants of the Ikshvakus look cheerful.
I had come here with the hope to see king Dasaratha who spends most of his time in my mother's residence. But today I do not see him .
I would like to pay obeisance at my father's feet. Will you answer my question, O mother, and tell me regarding his whereabouts? Or perchance could he be at the residence of my eldest mother Kausalya?
In spite of knowing everything, Kaikeyi actuated by greed for the kingdom, broke the unpleasant and dreadful news as if it were pleasing to Bharata, who was ignorant of what had transpired.
Your highsouled, brilliant father ever engaged in performing sacrifices and a refuge for the virtuous people, went the inevitable way every living being must follow (attained heaven).
On hearing these words, he (Bharata), born of a righteous race and endowed with purity of character was shattered by the immense grief of his father's demise and dropped down instantaneously on the floor.
The mightyarmed, valiant Bharata, uttering pitiable words, evoking compassion. Alas, I am finished fell down at once throwing up his arms.
Overwhelmed with grief, radiant Bharata reeling with delusion due to sorrow, lamented over the death of his father.
This couch of my father once used to shine like the spotless night sky irradiated by the autumnal Moon.
But today this couch without my sagacious father no longer shines like the sky without the Moon or like the sea evaporated.
Bharata, the foremost among the victorious, clearing his tearchoked throat and covering his auspicious countenance with raiment, wept in profound distress with tears overflowing.
Anguished and griefstricken, he who resembled the gods, fell down on the ground like a trunk of the sala tree in the forest severed by an axe. Seeing her son who was like a mighty elephant or like the Sun or the Moon, Kaikeyi lifted him up from the ground and spoke these words:
O illustrious prince arise, arise. Why are you lying down on the floor? Learned people like you, who are worthy of honour in the assembly ought not to grieve like this.
O highly intelligent one, by your wisdom, virtuous conduct and scriptural knowledge you are entitled to dispense charity and perform sacrifices. You will always shine incessantly like light of the Sun.
Bharata engulfed in profuse sorrow wept for a long time rolling on the ground and then said these words in reply to his mother:
Thinking that the king is about to consecrate Rama or perform some sacrifice, I undertook the journey in great delight.
Now everything has turned out to be different. My mind is shattered.I no longer behold my father who is ever intent on my welfare and happiness.
O mother what ailment caused the king's death before I could return? How fortunate are Rama and others by whom the last rites of my father were performed
Where is that hand of my father of unwearied actions, the hand that would wipe away the dust from my person with a pleasant touch?
Announce at once my arrival to the wise Rama, the man of unwearied actions, my brother, father and friend whose slave I am.
To one who knows the ways of righteouness the elder brother is (like) the father. Indeed, he (Rama) is my refuge and I shall hold his feet now.
What did my father, the noble king, conversant with righteous conduct, true, to his vows, one who always conducted himself in a righteous manner, whose truth was his prowess (at the time of his death)?
I want to hear the exact words of my father's last message to me. Thus questioned (by Bharata), Kaikeyi related the exact facts:
The magnanimous king, the foremost of those who attained the excellent state after, death, went to the other world, lamenting 'O Rama, O Sita, O Lakshamana'.
Your father, caught by the noose of death, like a great elephant bound by cords, uttered these last words:
'Those men who will see Rama returning home along with Sita and mightyarmed Lakshmana, will have their desires fulfilled.'
Bharata was more distraught on hearing the words that conveyed the second unpleasant tidings. With downcast countenance, he again enquired of his mother thus:
Where has righteous Rama who enhances the delight of Kausalya along with his  brother Lakshmana and Sita gone now?
Thus questioned, his mother started relating the exact events, presuming them to be pleasant tidings (for Bharata).
O my son, prince Rama attired in garments of bark along with Sita and followed by Lakshmana left for the great Dandaka forest.
Conscious of the glory of his race, Bharata continued to enquire if there was any unrighteous conduct on the part of his brother.
I hope Rama did not seize the wealth of any brahmin nor did any harm to an innocent person, whether rich or poor.
I hope he did not covet another man's wife. Like a sinner who had slain a child in embryo why has he been banished to Dandaka forest?
Then the capricious mother, with the same feminine disposition which she had displayed earlier, started giving a faithful account of all her deeds.
On hearing the words of great Bharata, that foolish woman Kaikeyi thinking herself to be wise, cheerfully said:
Rama did not rob any brahmin of even a little wealth nor did he harm any innocent man, whether rich or poor. He never casts his eyes on another's wife.
My son, I on hearing of Rama's consecration asked your father to confer the kingdom on you and banish Rama.
Your father, faithful to his word, banished Rama along with Lakshmana and Sita.
The renowned ruler of the earth (king Dasaratha), unable to behold (the sorry state of) his beloved son and stricken by filial grief, merged into the five elements (died).
O knower of dharma, assume kingship now. It is only for your sake that all this has been done by me.
My son, give up sorrow and agony and take recourse to courage. This city as well as the kingdom, free from all obstacles, is under your control.
On hearing about the demise of the father and his two brothers sent in exile, Bharata  overtaken by sorrow spoke thus:
Bereft of my father and my brother who was like a father to me, of what avail is this kingdom to me when I am grieving and fallen into misfortunes?
You have caused the death of the king and reduced Rama to an ascetic. You have piled one sorrow over sorrow on me like rubbing salt to the wound
You have come here for the destruction of this race, like a fatal night. My father did not realize that he was embracing a live charcoal.
O woman of sinful thoughts, you have brought about the death of my father. O obloquy of the race, by your folly you have deprived this family of its happiness.
My father king Dasaratha who is bound to truth and highly renowned, having come under your influence and tormented by intense grief has departed from this world.
Why was my father the righteous maharaja killed? Why was Rama exiled into the forest?
Tormented by the grief of separation from their sons, it is difficult for Kausalya and Sumitra to survive under you, O my mother.
My noble and righteous brother (Rama), who is well aware of his duties to the elders conducted himself before you as he would before his own mother.
You have forced Kausalya's son, so pure in mind, to wear garments made of bark and dwell in the forest. Do you not feel remorse for it, O perverse wretch?
The glorious, valiant, selfpossessed (Rama) had never contemplated evil. What possible reason do you have for sending him, clothed in bark, into exile?
Being avaricious, you are, I think, unaware of my devotion to Rama. This great calamity has been brought about by you for (your greed for) the kingdom.
When Rama and Lakshmana, the best of men stay away from me, by virtue of what mighty power am I competent to protect this kingdom?
The mighty and righteous maharaja used to rely upon the powerful Rama just as mount Meru depends on the forest surrounding it for its protection.
Like a young untrained bullock that cannot carry the weight fit for a great bull, with what strength can I bear this burden?
If I gather the strength (to carry the burden) either by employing the four expedients (available to a king against an enemy) or by the power of intellect, I will not allow you, covetous of your son, to fulfil your ambition.
Had Rama not treated you as his own mother I would not have the slightest hesitation to renounce you, a lady of sinful disposition.
O woman of sinful thoughts fallen from virtuous conduct, how did you entertain this thought reproachable to our ancestors?
In our race only the eldest son is installed in the kingdom and the other brothers behave with utmost respect towards him.
O cruel one I suppose neither have you any respect for the royal tradition nor are you aware of the everlasting benefit that ensues in following the royal traditon.
According to the established law of royalty, the eldest son is invariably crowned in the kingdom. This is true of all kings. This is a special tradition of the kings of the Ikshvaku race.
As for the Ikshvaku kings, righteousness is their sole protection. They follow the ancestral traditions befitting the noble race. This tradition has been topsyturvied by admitting you into the family.
Even the kings in your ancestral family were highly distinguished men. How did this condemnable deflection originate in your mind?
O woman of sinful disposition, I on my part will not fulfil your cherished desire. You have started a distressing deed to bring an end to my existence.
To cause a great discomfiture for you, right now I shall bring back my faultless brother, the beloved of his people, from the forest.
With the effulgent Rama brought back, I shall serve him with a  steadfast mind.
Having inflicted on his mother these unpleasant words in this manner, the highsouled Bharata, overwhelmed with grief, roared again like a lion in a mountaincave.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रिसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventythird sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Overtaken by great wrath, Bharata reproached his mother and then said to her again:
O cruel Kaikeyi of wicked conduct, you may be deprived of the kingdom. Abandoned by righteousness, you shall be weeping for me after my death.
Death for the king and exile for Rama, similar fate for both, have befallen on your account. What possible harm, either the king or the highly virtuous Rama has done to you?
O Kaikeyi by destroying this race you have earned the demerit of killing an embryo and shall enter hell. You shall never attain the same state of living, in the  afterworld of your husband.
That by doing this horrible deed you have committed a great sin of renouncing Rama, the beloved of all worlds. Therefore I am overtaken by fear.
You have caused my father's death and Rama's exile. As for me, I have obtained ignominy in this world.
O cruel woman, O woman of vicious character you are an enemy assuming a mother's form, lustful for kingdom. You are a murderess (of your husband) and I shall never speak to you.
As you have vitiated the race, my mothers Kausalya and Sumitra are overwhelmed with great sorrow.
As you sent virtuous Rama, ever devoted to truth, into the forest, my father died out of grief (due to separation from  his son). Therefore, you are not the true daughter of the righteous and sagacious king Aswapati but a demoness born there to destroy your father's race.
The sin you have committed with a particular objective has affected me and (as a result) I am left without my father. I am abandoned by my brothers. I am hated by every one in this entire world.
O woman of sinful convictions you will go to hell. You have separated righteous Kausalya from her son. For having committed such a sin, what afterworld awaits you  (is not known)?
O cruel one why do you not realise that Rama, born of Kausalya, is the eldest son and equal to my father? He is selfrestrained and a refuge to his kith and kin.
A son born from every limb, big or small, and from the heart is the most beloved of all for his mother while the other relatives are only loving ones.
It is said that once upon a time Surabhi, the divine cow, highly respected by the gods and conversant with righteous ways, beheld her two sons who fainted due to fatigue while carrying the burden of the ploughs.
On seeing her two sons lying on earth exhausted, she wailed in distress for them with her eyes filled with tears.
The fine drops of her fragnant tears trickled down the body of the great king of the gods (Indra).
When Indra, lord of the gods, saw those tears of holy fragrance fallen on his body he understood that the tears were shed by the venerated Kamadhenu.
While looking around Indra beheld Kamadhenu in intense pain stationed in the sky,   looking distressed and miserable, and wailing.
The king of the gods, Indra, wielder of thunderbolt, saw the renowned Kamadhenu consumed with grief. Alarmed, he said to her with palms joined in reverence:
'O holy cow fear not. You wish the welfare of all, Has any great calamity befallen us from any quarter? I hope not. What is the reason for your sorrow? Tell me'.
On hearing the sagacious Indra, king of the gods, Kamadhenu, proficient in speech, calmly replied:
'God forbid, O Indra, lord of the Immortals no calamity has befallen you from any quarter. Only I am in trouble. I am weeping for these pair of bulls, my own sons who are in difficulty. When I see them scorched by the rays of the Sun, miserable, emaciated and weeping, beaten by a ploughman, I am immersed in grief'.
'These bulls were born from my body and they are oppressed by the burden. Having seen their anguish, I am extremely grieved. There is none so dear as a son'.
The wishfulfilling cow (Kamadhenu) had innumerable sons spread all over the world. When Indra saw that Kamadhenu too was weeping for her sons, he concluded 'there is no one greater than a son'.
Wishing always to nourish the worlds Kamadhenu conducts herself with an unequalled character. In accordance with her nature, she has imbibed in herself eminent virtues. She is endowed with all prosperity. In spite of her thousand sons, she is weeping thus for her two bulls, what can one say of Kausalya separated from her only son Will she be her normal self again?'
This pious lady is blessed with only one son and (now) has been rendered childless by you. Therefore, you shall experience grief in this world and hereafter.
As for me, I shall do whatever is necessary for the atonement of the improper conduct shown towards my father and brother and for enhancement of my fame. There is no doubt  about it.
If I fail to bring back the mighty son of  Kausalya, I shall enter the forest frequented by ascetics.
O vicious one, O evilintentioned one being watched by the citizens with their throats choked with tears of grief, I cannot endure the burden of the sin committed by you.
Jump into the fire or go to Dandaka forest or hang yourself. There is no other recourse for you.
When Rama who has truth as his prowess accepts the kingdom, I shall have accomplished my purpose at last and I shall be free from all blemishes.
In this way like an elephant driven by prods and goads in the forest, highly enraged Bharata hissing like a serpent dropped down on the ground.
Prince Bharata, the scorcher of enemies, with bloodshot eyes, raiment in disarray, ornaments tossed about lay fallen on the ground like the banner of Indra (husband of Sachi) at the close of the festival of flaghoisting.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुस्सप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventyfourth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
On regaining his senses after a long time, the valiant Bharata looked at his unfortunate mother whose eyes were filled with tears, and condemned her amidst the counsellors.
Neither did I ever desire the kingdom nor did I ever consult my mother in this regard and I am not even aware of the consecration that was planned by the king for I was away in a distant country with Satrughna.
I knew nothing of the banishment of great Rama nor did I know how Lakshmana or Sita had gone on exile.
As magnanimous Bharata was wailing, Kausalya recognised his voice and said to Sumitra:
Bharata, the farsighted son of Kaikeyi of cruel deeds has come and I wish to see him.
Having said so to Sumitra, Kausalya trembling and almost lifeless, emaciated, sullied and turned pallid set out for the place where Bharat was.
But at the same time Bharata, the younger brother of Rama accompanied by Satrughna  proceeded to the place where Kausalya resided.
Then agonised Bharata and Satrughna, beholding that venerable, noblehearted, griefstricken, weeping Kausalya who was  almost semiconscious overcome with grief, approached her with great sorrow and hugged her.
Looking at Bharata, the deeply afflicted Kausalya said, The kingdom which you had desired has been acquired without any obstacle. Alas Kaikeyi had quickly secured it for you  through her crooked act.
What advantage did cruel Kaikeyi visualize in sending away my son to dwell in the forest  wearing robes of bark?
Kaikeyi should send me also without any delay to that place where my illustrious  Rama with golden navel dwells.
Or else I, accompanied by Sumitra, shall go happily on my own holding the sacred fire in front to that place where Rama dwells.
Or, you should now take me personally to that place where, my son Rama, the best among men, is performing austerities.
This vast kingdom, with all its abundance of wealth and grain, elephants, horses and chariots has been delivered to you by her.
Thus reproached by many a harsh word, like needle pricking a wound, the sinless Bharata was intensely pained.
(Having heard these words), his senses reeling, he became unconscious, lamented profusaly and fell at her feet. And on regaining his senses, he stood motionless.
As Kausalya was lamenting in this manner, overwhelmed with deep grief, Bharata, his palms joined in reverence, replied her in these words:
O noble lady unaware (of what had happened), I am guiltless. Why do you upbraid me? You know well my profound, steadfast affection for Raghava (Rama).
Did not the one who counselled the banishment of my noble brother who is steadfast and bound by truth and virtue, ever adhered to scriptures?(or)My noble brother (Rama), the best among the virtuous, bound to truth, is banished. Let not such thought occur at any time to one who steadfastly adheres to scriptures
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother, Rama be cursed with the sin of undergoing servitude in the hands of most sinful of men, the sin of passing urine facing the Sun and of kicking a sleeping cow.
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the demerit of unrighteousness in the same way as a master who gets a difficult work done by a servant without remuneration.
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way as a man  acting treacherously against a king who rules like a father and protects his subjects like his own children, acquires.
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire unrighteousness in the same way as a king who, having received one sixth of the income as tax from people does not protect them
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way as a person acquires for having promised the ascetics the required offering at a sacrifice and later denies them
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the demerit in the same way as a person, who having gone to the battleground abundantly provided with elephants, horses, chariots and weapons fails to discharge the duty (of a fighter)
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire demerit in the same way as an evilhearted person who forever destroys the subtle meaning of the scriptures imparted carefully by a sagacious preceptor
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother be highly unfortunate like me in not being able to behold that longarmed and broadshoulderd one seated on the throne and resembling both the Sun and the Moon in radiance
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the demerit in the same way as a person, who partakes the sweet milkrice, sesamerice and goat's flesh without purpose (without invoking and offering it to the gods) and disrespects the teachers
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way a person who kicks the cows abuses elders and causes great offence to his friends
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother, acquire the sin in the same way as a wickedminded person, who divulges the words of abuse secretly confided in him by his friends.
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother be hated universally as one who never helps any one, who is ungrateful, shameless and as one who has committed the sin of suicide
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother  acquire the sin in the same way as one who, although surrounded by wife, children and servants, eats the delicacies all alone without sharing acquires.
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother die without winning a worthy wife and without begetting offspring and without performing religious deeds
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother live an entire life of anguish without begetting children through his wife or without seeing his own children
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the same sin as one acquires for murdering a king, a woman, children and the aged and deserting dependents
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the same sin as one who supports his wife and children by trafficking in lac, wine, meat and metal and poison acquires
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the same sin like a warrior, dreadful to the enemy side who will be slain while fleeing from the war at its peak
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother, wander this earth, begging alms, holding a human skull like an insane man dressed in rags
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother be always addicted to wine, women and gambling and be swayed by desire and anger
May the mind of that man who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother not be established in virtue May he practise unrighteousness and confer charity on the unworthy
May that man's accumulated extensive posssessions of various kinds of wealth be  snatched away by thieves in thousands of ways if he had counselled the exile of my esteemed brother
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the extent of demerit fixed for a person, who sleeps at the hour of twilight of dawn and dusk
May that one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way as a person who sets fire to human settlements, violates the preceptors's bed and betrays his friend
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother, acquire the sin in the same way as a person who fails to show obedience to the gods and the ancestors and to serve his parents
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother be expelled  this very moment from the world approved by virtuous men, from their renown and from their (noble) actions
The one who counselled the exile of my noble, longarmed and broadchested brother be banished like the one who commited the sin of leaving the ministration to his mother and engaging himself in purposeless acts
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother be always miserable with many sons, poverty and fever and disease
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way a person disappoints who miserable mendicants seeking alms and looking up to him for help
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way as a person, who is abusive, niggardly, impure, unrighteous and always afraid of being caught by the king, and lives by cheating others, acquires
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way as a wickedminded person who neglects his chaste wife observing the menstrual period unfavourable for conception and had bathed after menstruation  acquires
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way a foolish person who abandons righteous conduct and  forsakes his rightfully married wife and resorts to other man's wife acquires
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the same sin like that of a lowbred brahmin who commits an irreversible sin acquires
May the sin of polluting drinking water and administering poison to others be put together and be incurred by the man who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way a person with befouled senses disturbs the offerings of worship kept ready for a brahmin and milks the cow having a young calf acquires.
May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way a person who in possession of water does not give it to one suffering from thirst acquires it
May that one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way a person acquires while giving onesided judgement between divided religious disputants
While thus appeasing Kausalya deprived of her husband and son, Bharata, filled with grief, fell down at her feet.
Kausalya said these words to Bharata who fell unconscious, consumed with grief, while swearing on painful oaths.
O son by swearing on oaths, you are choking the very breath of my life and my suffering has grown still more.
O dear child, fortunately your mind is unswerved from righteousness. You being truthful to your promise shall attain the world of virtuous men along with Lakshmana.
After having addressed Bharata, who was affectionate towards his brother that way, Kausalya  drew the mightyarmed one onto her lap and hugged him and cried out with extreme grief.
Afflicted by sorrow and lamenting thus, great Bharata's mind became unsteady owing to swooning and  besieged by grief.
Vasistha, the most eloquent and the best of ascetics said to Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi who was tormented with grief:
O prince of great renown, may God bless you It is not proper on your part to grieve. It is time to perform the funeral rites of the king in the best way possible.
On hearing the words of Vasistha, dutiful Bharata regained his steadiness and engaged in the performance of the funeral rites.
The mortal remains of king Dasaratha, protector of the earth, was taken out of the oil container and placed on the floor. His pale, yellow face appeared as if he was asleep. Thereafter it was laid upon a magnificent couch adorned with every kind of gem. On seeing Dasaratha in that state  Bharata lamented in extreme distress.
What have you done, O king, between my absence and my arrival? You have banished the righteous Rama and the valiant Lakshmana.
O great king Where will you go leaving me who is bewailing for having been left by Rama, the lion among men and a man of pious deeds?
O king O father you have gone to heaven and Rama has taken shelter in the forest now. Who will take care of the welfare and security of your city?
O king bereft of you, the earth (kingdom) is widowed and has lost its radiance. The city appears to me like a moonless night.
To Bharata who was thus lamenting with a dejected mind, the great ascetic Vasistha once again said:
O mightyarmed prince, the funeral rites that are required to be performed for the departed king ought to be done carefully without any shortcomings.
Bharata said, 'Be it so' in obedience to Vasistha, who hastened up the learned Vedic scholars, family priests and preceptors to perform various rites.
The sacrificial fire of the king has been put outside the firesanctuary in accordance with the ritual precepts and were withdrawn by the attendants and priests wellversed in Vedic lore.
Thereafter the attendants raised the mortal remains of the deceased king onto a litter, with dejected minds, throats choked with tears and carried him away.
The people went ahead of the king's body strewing on the way gold of brilliant colour and different kinds of garments.
In this way others brought sandal, agaru and fragrant gum gugul, the resin of balsa tree and woods of sarala, padmaka and devadaru and built a pyre and strew many kinds of fragrant substances on it. Thereafter the priests laid the mortal remains of the king in the centre of the pyre.
Then the priests offering oblations to the king's fire, intoned prayers. The reciters of Sama Veda sang the hymns in accordance with the sacred scriptures.
Then in accordance with their rank and surrounded by aged guards, the wives of  king Dasaratha departed for that place from the city in palanquins and other carriages.
Then the priests and other women led by Kausalya who was consumed with grief circumambulated the pyre in the reverse direction as the king's body was engulfed by flames.
At that time, piteous cries of distressed women in their thousands like the piercing cries of female kraunchas (birds) were heard.
Thereafter, the courtesans weeping uncontrollably and, lamenting again and again, alighted from carriages on the bank of the river Sarayu.
The wives of the king, counsellors and priests along with Bharata offered waterlibation and entered the city with tearful eyes. They spent the tenday  mourning period sleeping on the ground (floor) in great grief.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षटसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventysixth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Having observed the tenday mourning period, Bharata purified himself on the twelfth day and got the shraddha rites (obsequies) performed.
During the shraddha ceremony (obsequies) Bharata bestowed on brahmins precious stones, wealth, large quantities of rice, highly valuable garments and various gems.
At the time of performing the rites pertaining to the other world, Bharata bestowed on brahmins herds of white goats, cows in hundreds, male and female servants and spacious houses and carriages.
Thereafter at the hour of dawn on the thirteenth day mightyarmed Bharata visited the cemetery to perform the purificatory ceremony. Approaching the place of the funeral pyre of his father, he lamented in the intensity of grief:
O dear father, my brother Rama to whom you have entrusted me has been sent to the forest now and I am  left in a vacuum.
Where have you gone, my king my father, forsaking mother Kausalya who is without a protector and whose only support Rama, her son has been sent away to the forest?
Having seen the circular place, looking reddishbrown with burnt bones and ashes, where his father's body was consumed by fire, Bharata started crying aloud in deep despondency.
On seeing the cremation ground desolate Bharata collapsed sobbing on the ground like a fastened flag staff of Indra, which fell as it was being raised.
Immediately all his counsellors ran towards him like the ascetics who raised Yayati, a man of pious vows, when he fell down at the final hour.
Beholding Bharata, Satrughna also plunged in grief remembering the king, and fell unconscious on the ground.
Recollecting the many virtues of his father again and again, like a madman, Satrughna, mentally unsteady, lamented in profound sorrow.
With Manthara as the source, Kaikeyi as a crocodile, this terrible sea of sorrow which has submerged all of us lies unruffled.
Where have you gone dear father, leaving the lamenting Bharata, so young and tender, who was always your darling?
You used to make all of us choose delicious food, drinks, garments and ornaments. Who else will do that now?
You are a righteous and mighty king and without you, this earth would have been broken into pieces. But it does not.
With my father ascended to heaven and Rama gone to the forest, where is the strength in me to live? I shall enter the blazing fire.
Devoid of my father and brother, I will not return to empty Ayodhya that was once ruled by the Ikshvakus. I will enter the grove of asceticism .
Having heard the lamentataions of both the brothers and reflecting the calamity befallen on them, the attendants felt extremely afflicted once again.
Thereafter, both Satrughna and Bharata, dejected and exhausted, lay writhing on the  floor like two bulls with their horns broken.
Then his father's family priest Vasistha of composed mind and versed in the Vedas  raised Bharata and said to him:
O lord, this is the thirteenth day since the death of your father. The heap of bones and ashes still remain on the pyre. Why this delay on your part?
There are three dualities  (hunger and thirst, pain and pleasure, birth and death), which are applicable to all living beings without any exception and cannot be eschewed. Therefore, it does not behove you to act in this way.
The knower of reality Sumantra helped Satrughna to rise, after having consoled him, imparted him the truth about the inevitability of birth and death.
Having risen from the earth both the illustrious tigers among men, Bharata and Satrughna looked  faded and weather beaten like the banners of Indra that had faded under the Sun and rain.
The counsellors hastened up both the sons, who were wiping away the tears and speaking with blodshot eyes, to complete the remaining part of  the funeral rites.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventyseventh sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
As the griefstricken Bharata was intending to proceed to Rama, Lakshmana's younger brother Satrughna said to him:
Couldn't the mighty Rama who is the ultimate refuge of all beings protect himself in his own distress? That Rama has been exiled to the forest by a woman.
And why did not Lakshmana who is strong and powerful release Rama from exile by restraining our father?
In the first place, the king could have restrained himself by reflecting on whether the course of action adopted by him under the influence of a woman was just or unjust.
While Satrughna, brother of Lakshmana was conversing thus, the hunchback Manthara decorated with all kinds of ornaments arrived at the entrance.
She had besmeared herself with the essence of sandal, had put on royal garments and adorned herself in many ways with every kind of ornament.
Tied with colourful girdle strings and wearing many other auspicious ornaments, she looked like a female monkey tied with a rope.
Seeing the hunchback, doer of many sinful deeds, the gatekeepers caught hold of her and informed Satrughna.
Here is that sinful, cruel woman on whose account Rama is in the forest and your father has forsaken his body. Do with her as it pleases you.
Intensely grieved to hear those words, Satrughna who was steadfast in his vows said to the inmates of the inner apartment:
Let this woman, who caused deep sorrow to our brothers and father, reap the fruit of her malicious actions.
Saying thus, he forcibly caught hold of the hunchback amidst her companions when she filled the house with her cries.
Perceiving the enraged Satrughna all her companions shook in terror and fled in different directions.
All her companions conversed among themselves. The way he began, it looks he will finish all of us.
Let us seek refuge under the illustrious Kausalya, who is compassionate, generous,  and knower of righteousness. She is our sure saviour.
With bloodshot eyes Satrughna, the scorcher of enemies, dragged the shrieking hunchback down the ground in fury.
While Manthara was being dragged by Satrughna, the collection of ornaments of many colours and of various kinds worn by her were broken and  scattered here and there all over the ground.
The resplendent royal palace, strewn all over with several ornaments on the ground  shone like the autumnal sky (studded with innumerable stars).
The mighty and the best of men Satrughna seized with fury, forcibly caught hold of that hunchback and censured Kaikeyi with harsh words.
Kaikeyi, deeply distressed at those harsh and grievous words was afraid of Satrughna and sought the protection of her son Bharata.
Bharata, addressing the enraged Satrughna said Of all beings a lady is not to be killed.  Pardon her.
If righteous Rama were not to accuse me of slaying a mother, I would have killed the sinful Kaikeyi of wicked deeds myself.
If righteous Rama comes to know that this hunchback has been slain by us, he will certainly never talk to you or me.
Hearing the words of Bharata, Satrughna, the younger brother of Lakshmana restrained his fury and also released Manthara.
Manthara, tormented with grief, fell at the feet of Kaikeyi and began heaving deep sighs.
.Seeing the hunchback thrown down by Satrughna and lying senseless and anguished like a female krauncha bird caught in a net looking in different directions, Kaikeyi gently soothed her.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventyeighth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Then, at the hour of dawn on the fourteenth day, all those who were empowered to proclaim the king,  assembled and addressed Bharata:
Dasaratha, who was our most revered master and preceptor, having exiled his eldest son Rama and mighty Lakshmana, ascended heaven.
O illutrious prince do assume kingship now. Incidentally, there has been yet no attack on this leaderless kingdom.
O prince of the Raghu race (Bharata), your subjects and guilds of traders, artisans, etc, have procured necessary materials for your consecration, and  await you.
O best among men, inherit this stable kingdom of your ancestors, get yourself consecrated and save us.
Bharata, firm in vows, circumambulated all the articles procured in connection with consecration, and replied them as follows:
It has been the tradition in our race that the eldest son alone should always inherit the kingdom. It does not behove intelligent people like you to tell me like this.
Our eldest brother, Rama shall become king. As for me, I shall dwell in the forest for fourteen years.
Let the great and powerful army of four divisions be marshalled. I will bring back my eldest brother Rama from the forest.
I shall go to the forest to (bring back) Rama, with all these articles, procured for coronation kept in front.
After coronating Rama, the best of men, there itself, I will definitely bring him back, letting him go ahead of me, like the sacred fire carried from the place of sacrifice.
I shall never fulfil the wishes of that woman called my mother. I shall dwell in the inaccessible forest and Rama shall become king.
Let the road be aligned by artisans and uneven ground be levelled. The guards who judge the inaccessible terrains should follow them on their way.
When prince Bharata was thus speaking in favour of Rama, all the people responded with these excellent, propitious words:
May Lakshmi, goddess of prosperity, abide in you for having expressed your desire to bestow the kingdom upon the king's eldest son.
With such graceful words spoken by the prince within their hearing, tears of joy filled the eyes of the noble people and fell drop by drop down their faces.
All the ministers and members of the council, relieved of their distress, were delighted to hear these words and said O best among men, on your orders devoted people and groups of artisans have been instructed to lay the road. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनाशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventyninth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Then surveyors, experts in measurment, energetic and zealous labourers, excavators, engineers, skilled workers, architects, craftsmen, carpenters, roadlevellers, woodcutters, welldiggers, whitewashers, basketmakers, competent supervisors were sent in advance.
Like a swollen ocean on a fullmoon day the multitude of people proceeded joyfully with great speed to the appointed place.
Those groups who were skilled in the construction of roads took up their places with every kind of tool and departed ahead of others.
Clearing and cutting branches of various trees and creepers, shrubs, plants branchless trees and hewing boulders, the road was paved by the king's men.
Some of them, planted saplings in places where there were none, while some others severed trees here and there with axes, hatchets and sickles.
Some other stronger men, plucked the strongrooted tufts of fragrant grass. Here and there they made impassable terrains even.
Some filled wells and chasms with loose soil, while others made low level grounds plain and wide on all sides.
People threw bridges at places that needed to be bridged. They pulverised stones that obstructed the path and split open big stones to drain out water.
In a short time they constructed many water reservoirs of different shapes capable of holding large volumes of water like the sea.
In arid places, various good drinkingwaterwells surrounded by dykes were dug.
The highway for the army was paved smooth, with its surface decorated with mosaic.  It was lined with blossoming trees with flocks of birds intoxicated with singing. It was decked with banners and sprinkled with sandal water and a strewn with flowers of every kind. Like the path of gods, the highway shone with brilliance.
Those authorised ordered the artisans to perform their respective tasks. Thereafter, they selected lovely tracts of land filled with trees bearing varieties of sweet fruits as restingplace for great Bharata and decorated them so splendidly, that they looked like ornaments themseleves.
Men wellversed in the study of planetary positions relating to auspicious constellations and auspicious times arranged different restingplaces at different times during the sojourn of great Bharata.
They heaped sand and dug moats around the restingplace. It was adorned with wellbuilt highways and broad thoroughfares, lined with mansions surrounded by walls as high as mount Indrakeela. The peaks of those tall residences decorated with flags which looked as if spreading into the sky. (Thus the restingplace) shone like the abode of Indra.
The reached Ganga with its cool and limpid waters abounding in large fishes, its bank lined with groves of various trees.
The lovely royal road constructed in an orderly fashion by eminent craftsmen looked splendid like the clear sky decorated with by the Moon and clusters of stars.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightieth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Thereafter bards and panegyrists adept in conversation with an auspicious start pleased Bharata with eulogy in the last part of the night.
The drums of the night watch were beaten by golden sticks. Conches in hundreds were blown and sounds of various modulations were created.
The shrill trempets which seemed to fill the heavens caused much more distress to the already griefstricken Bharata.
Then Bharata waking up, exclaimed, I am not the king, ordered the pipers to stop and said to Satrughna:
O Satrughna see what great harm has been done to these people at the instance of Kaikeyi. King Dasaratha has gone, leaving me to suffer.
This kingdom, rooted in the righteousness of that noble king, is now whirling like a boat in a whirlpool without a helmsman.
Even Rama, a great protector for all of us, has been banished to the forest by my mother bereft of virtuous conduct.
Thus lamenting, Bharata fainted. Seeing him (in this state) all the women (of the inner apartment) at once cried aloud piteously.
While Bharata was weeping, illustrious Vasistha, conversant with royal traditions, entered the assembly hall of the lord of the Iksvakus (king Dasaratha).
Righteous Vasistha along with his disciples reached the lovely golden assembly hall  inlaid with gems and precious stones, which resembled Sudharma, (the assembly hall of Indra).
Vasistha, wellversed in all the Vedas, sat on a golden seat with a comfortable cover and ordered the messengers:
Fetch quietly brahmins, kshatriyas, vaisyas, ministers and army commanders at once. A matter of great urgency awaits us.
Bring all the royal attendants, Satrughna, the illustrious Bharata, Yudhajit, Sumantra and all those wellwishers of the king.
As they (invitees) began arriving on chariots, horses and elephants, there arose a great tumult.
Then as Bharata apprroached,  ministers and subjects greeted him as they used to greet Dasaratha, just as gods greet Indra, the performer of a hundred sacrifices.
The assembly hall looked splendid like a lake of tranquil waters with gems, shells  pebbles, grains of sand and teeming with whales and serpents in the presence of the son of king Dasaratha. It appeared as though Dasaratha himself was present.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकाशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightyfirst sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Sagacious Bharata beheld that assembly hall filled with honourable members, like the fullmoon beholds the night stretching forth (with stars).
When the seats were occupied by the honourable members according to their rank, that august assembly looked splendid with the brilliance of their apparels and fragrance of unguents.
The most splendid assembly filled with learned people looked brilliant like the night with the autumnal fullmoon.
The chief priest Vasistha, knower of righteousness, looked at all the ministers present and addressed Bharata in a gentle voice.
O dear child following the righteous path king Dasaratha conferred on you this vast kingdom abounding in wealth and grains before attaining heaven.
Abiding in truth, remembering the righteous ways of virtuous men just as the rising Moon does not leave its beams, Rama too did not move away from his father's command.
The kingdom free from obstacles has been passed on to you by your father and brother. Get yourself coronated quickly and enjoy it along with your cheerful ministers.
Let kings from the north, the west, the south, the bordering kingdoms, and the seatraders offer you crores of gems as gifts.
On hearing those words, Bharata who knew his duty was overwhelmed with distress and, resolved to abide by righteousness, reached Rama through his mind (thought of Rama).
Young Bharata with the melodious voice of a swan, choked with tears, lamenting in the assembly, reproached the family priest Vasistha, saying:
Would any man seize this kingdom which rightfully belongs to sagacious Rama, who practises brahmacharya, who is wellversed in all branches of learning and who endeavours to protect righteousness?
How can any usurper of the kingdom be born of Dasaratha? Or, how would any progeny of Dasaratha become the usurper of the kingdom? I and the kingdom, both belong to Rama. You should tell the truth about this.
The eldest, eminent and righteous Rama, the scion of the Kakutstha dynasty, who is comparable to Dilipa and Nahusha deserves to inherit this kingdom just as Dasaratha did.
If I commit this evil act followed by wretched people which would not lead any one to  heaven, I shall only be bringing disgrace to the kings of the Ikshvaku dynasty.
I will never accept the evil deed committed by my mother. From here itself I shall pay obeisance with folded palms to my brother who dwells in the impenetrable forest.
I shall follow Rama the best among men. He alone and no one else deserves to rule over the kingdom of the three worlds.
Hearing the words of Bharata full of righteousness, all the men assembled there   shed tears of joy, thinking of Rama.
If I am not able to bring back my noble brother (Rama) from the forest, I shall also dwell there like my noble brother Lakshmana.
I shall employ all possible means to bring him back and join you who are respectable, virtuous and pious.
I have already despatched the explorers and protectors of roads who work for wages and without wages as well. It also pleases me to undertake this journey.
Righteous Bharata who was full of devotion towards his brother having uttered thus, addressed  the skilful counsellor Sumantra standing nearby:
O Sumantra quickly rise and go. On my authority, order the expedition and let the army be marshalled at once.
On hearing the words of the magnanimous Bharata, Sumantra was delighted and as  instructed, ordered everything as if he was anxious to do it himself.
Having come to know that orders were issued to send the army on an expedition to bring back Rama, the subjects and the army chiefs were delighted.
Then, the wives of the soldiers having come to know of the expedition were all delighted and in every household hastened up their husbands.
Those chiefs of the army urged the soldiers, horses, fastmoving bullockcarts and swift chariots (to move on).
When Bharata saw that the army was ready, he instructed Sumantra who was standing by the side of the preceptor to quickly prepare his chariot.
He (Sumantra) received the command of Bharata in great delight and set out with a chariot harnessed with excellent horses.
Bharata, a descendant of the Raghu race, firm in truth, one whose valour comes out of unswerving truth, speaking judiciously said this to propitiate his esteemed brother who was in the dense forest:
O Sumantra, arise, go at once to the leaders of the army and ask them to assemble the troops. I shall propifiate Rama who is in the deep forest and bring him back for the welfare of the world.
The charioteer categorically commanded by Bharata, his desire fulfilled, communicated the royal mandate to all important subjects, chiefs of army and friends.
Thereafter, men from every household, kshatriyas, vaisyas, sudras and brahmins came out and harnessed their chariots to the camels and asses, elephants and horses of high pedigree.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्व्यशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightysecond sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Getting up at dawn, Bharata boarded his excellent chariot and set forth swiftly, longing to see Rama.
All the ministers and priests went ahead of Bharata mounting their chariots,  harnessed with horses and resembling the chariot of the Sun god.
As per tradition, nine thousand elephants were arranged to follow Bharata, delight of the race of the Ikshvakus as he set out.
Sixty thousands chariots and many archers holding weapons of every kind followed the illustrious prince Bharata as he went.
One hundred thousand horses each mounted by a rider followed Bharata, one who had conquered  his passion and adhered to truth.
Kaikeyi, Sumitra as well as the illustrious Kausalya travelled by a resplendent chariot, delighted with the thought of bringing Rama back.
Venerable people in groups, narrating various accomplishments of Rama and eager to see him with Lakshmana, proceeded in a delightful mood.
When shall we see that mightyarmed Rama of darkblue complexion like the raincloud, firm in strength and steadfast in vows and the destroyer of the sorrows of  this world?
At his sight alone our sorrows will be dispelled, the way the darkness of the entire world is dispelled by the rising Sun.
The inhabitants of the town proceeded joyfully, narrating Rama's delightful achievements on their way by embracing one another.
Respectable city folks, like traders and other subjects went along in great delight towards Rama.
Gempolishers, potters, weaponsmiths, weavers, makers of adornments with peacock feathers, sawyers, makers of artificial ornaments, perforators of shells and ornaments, ivoryworkers, whitewashers, purveyors of fragrant essences, renowned goldsmiths, blanketcleaners, hotbath attendants, physicians, vintners, incense merchants, washermen, tailors, headmen of villages and hamlets, actors along with their wives, fishermen -- all followed Bharata.
Brahmins learned in the Vedas and renowned for their virtuous conduct followed Bharta in their thousands on bullock carts with composed minds.
Dressed well in clean clothes and anointed with pure red sandalpaste, they all slowly followed Bharata, mounting on various vehicles.
The army, overwhelmed with joy and cheer followed the devoted brother Bharata who had set out to bring back Rama.
After travelling a long distance on chariots, carriages, horses and elephants, they reached the river Ganga close to Srngiberapura, a country ruled vigilantly by Rama's friend, the valiant Guha who lived there along with his relatives.
The army following Bharata reached the bank of the river Ganga, graced by chakravakas (ruddy geese) and halted there.
As he beheld the army following him and the river Ganga of sacred waters in front of him, Bharata who was proficient in speech said to his ministers:
You may, according to your convenience, halt the army anywhere here and, after taking rest (for the night), we shall cross the river Ganga tomorrow.
Meanwhile, I shall get into this river and offer libations with water to the departed king for the good of his life in the other world.
While he (Bharata's) was speaking this way, all the ministers assented by saying 'Be it so' and made arrangement for their troops to rest separately according to their pleasure.
The army encamped by Bharata looked splendid with royal insigaia. After making necessary arrangements for the army on the bank of the mighty river Ganga and pondering over the means of bringing back the magnanimous Rama, Bharata stayed.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्र्यशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightythird sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Guha, king of the nishadas, observed the bannered army encamped all along the bank of the river Ganga, hurried off and said to his kinsmen:
Here is an army as vast as the ocean, and I am unable to comprehend its magnitude even mentally.
It appears that the evilminded Bharata himself has come here. The emblem of a huge kovidara (pomegranate) tree is seen on his chariot.
Could it be that Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, has come here to bind us with the cords or to slay us? Or is he marching forward with the intention of taking possession of a prosperous, rare kingdom by slaying Rama who has been banished by his father:
Rama, son of Dasaratha, is not only my master but also my friend. Therefore, to safeguard his interests remain stationed here on the bank of the river Ganga.
Let all the fishermen, who live on meat, roots and fruits and protect the river, stay here with the troops by taking up positions along the banks of the river Ganga.
Let five hundred boats, each manned by a hundred young fishermen fully equipped, be in readiness he exhorted them.
Should it happen that Bharata is not illdisposed toward Rama, the army will safe cross the river Ganga today itself.
Having spoken thus, Guha, lord of the nishadas, approached Bharata, taking with him fish, meat and wine as offerings.
The valiant Sumantra, conversant with ways of modesty, observed Guha approaching them and humbly informed Bharata.
Guha who has come here surrounded by too many thousands of his relations is fully acquainted with the Dandaka forest. He is an aged man and a friend of your brother said Sumatra.
O scion of the Kakusthas (Bharata) therefore, give audience to the overlord of the nishadas, Guha, who undoubtedly knows the whereabouts of Rama and Lakshmana.
On hearing these auspicious words of Sumantra, Bharata said Let Guha see me at once.
Having obtaind the permission, a delighted Guha, escorted by his relatives,  approached Bharata and humbly said:
This country is like a pleasuregarden at the backyard of your palace. All of us are  subordinate to you and we solicit you to stay in the house of  this servant of yours.
Here are roots, fruits and a great variety of forest produce, fresh and dried meat brought by the nishadas.
We hope your army having  refreshed themselves will spend the night here. With our hospitality extended, you can proceed tomorrow.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुरशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightyfourth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
When thus spoken to, Bharata, a great intellectual, replied to Guha with these well thought out and meaningful words.
O dear friend of my elder brother, your desire to extend hospitality to this large army all alone is indeed noble.
Having spoken to Guha courteously, the majestic, radiant Bharata continued:
O Guha this region of Ganga with its dense forest is very difficult to cross. How can I reach the hermitage of Bharadwaja?
When he heard those words of the sagacious Bharata, Guha the forest ranger answered him reverentially with folded palms.
O prince of great renown I shall follow you, wellprepared with these fishermen, armed with bows.
Are you not going to that place with the evil intention of causing harm to Rama of unwearied actions? This large army of yours arouses doubts in me.
When he heard Guha thus speaking, Bharata who was as tranquil as the sky, said to him in a gentle voice.
That calmitous time will never come (again). You should not suspect me. I look upon Rama, my eldest brother, as my father.
I am going to bring back that scion of the kakutsthas (Rama) who resides in the forest. O Guha, do not entertain any other thought. I am tellng you the truth.
When he heard those words of Bharata, Guha was delighted and his face beamed with joy as he said to Bharata:
Blessed indeed you are as you desire to renounce the kingdom that has come to you effortlessly. I see none equal to you on this earth.
You desire to bring back Rama who is in great difficulty. This everlasting fame of yours will spread all over the world.
As Guha was thus conversing with Bharata, the rays of the Sun diminished and the night set in.
Fortunate Bharata gratified by Guha encamped his army and retired to bed along with Satrughna.
But the thought of Rama caused grief to the magnanimous Bharata, a man of righteous outlook who did not deserve such grief.
Just like a concealed forestfire scorching the dried up forest, the fire of sorrow kindled in his mind scorched Bharata.
Like the ice melted by the heat of the Sun's rays flows down the Himalayas, sweat poured from all parts of his body caused by the fire of grief.
Bharata, son of Kaikeyi was stricken by a lofty mountain of grief. The cavityless rocks of that mountain were his contemplation, the minerals were his sighs, the multitude of trees were his desolation, peaks were his fatigue and mental distress, the unlimited number of animals were his stupor, the bamboo tree was his sorrow.
Then best of men, Bharata, with highly distraught mind and heaving sighs, with senses bewildered and oppressed by the fever raging in his heart and caught in a great calamity, like a bull separated from the herd enjoyed no peace of mind.
Bharata, a man of great magnanimity, joined Guha together with his people with composed mind. Then Guha, greatly distraught, again consoled  Bharata  regarding his elder brother Rama.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चाशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightyfifth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Then Guha, the forest ranger, described to Bharata the countless qualities of the goodnatured, magnanimous Lakshmana:
I spoke to the virtuous Lakshmana, who was holding arrows, bow and sword in his hand and keeping awake completely for the protection of his brother.
My friend, Lakshmana, the delight of the Raghavas this comfortable couch has been arranged for you. Lie down peacefully without any anxiety.
O righteous one you are used to conforts where as all of our people are accustomed to hardships. So we will stay awake and protect Rama.
To me, there is none on earth dearer than Rama. Do not have any anxiety. I am telling you the truth.
By the grace of Rama, I want to acquire in this world great renown, abundance of righteousness, absolute artha (prosperity) and kama (pleasure).
As for me, bow in hand and all my kinsmen with me, I shall protect my dear friend Rama who is resting with Sita.
Nothing is unknown to me in this forest in which I range about continually. We can withstand an army of four divisions in a battle.
The magnanimous Lakshmana, established in dharma, replied:
While Rama sleep on the ground with Sita, how can I find sleep or joy or comfort?
O Guha behold Rama, whom gods and demons combined cannot withstand in a battle now lying on a bed of grass with Sita.
Rama is the only one among the sons who resembles his father in various virtues. Dasaratha obtained him after a great deal of austerities and efforts as well.
After Rama is exiled, king Dasaratha will not survive for long and surely the earth will soon be widowed.
The women of the inner apartment who lamented loudly, must have stopped weeping out of weariness. By now, the clamour in the king's palace would have surely subsided.
I doubt whether the king, Kausalya and my mother Sumitra and the rest of them will outlive this night.
My mother might live, looking at Satrughna. But Kausalya, who is the mother of a hero, will die from extreme grief.
My father, king Dasaratha, failing to fulfil his cherished desires one after another and unable to place Rama on the throne, will pass away.
When the moment of death arrives for my father, those who perform the funeral rites for him would have fulfilled their desire.
There in the capital of my father with its lovely crossroads and squares, welllaid  highways, full of mansions and palaces encrusted with all kinds of precious stones, teeming with elephants, horses and chariots, resounding with trumpets, and with wellbeing everywhere, and plenty of pleasuregardens, and parks and community festivals, people sound in health would be moving about in great comfort.
Can we ever reenter Ayodhya happily after safely fulfilling the vow and completing the term of exile?
While the highminded prince was lamenting this way and was waiting, the night passed off.
The next morning when the Sun shone bright, both of them matted their hair on the bank of the river Bhagirathi (Ganga) and I ferried them across comfortably.
Rama and Lakshmana, slayers of enemies, who are as strong as bull elephants, with their hair matted, wearing robes made of bark, armed with excellent bows, arrows and swords went along with Sita looking around (vigilantly).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षडशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightysixth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Extremely unhappy over what he heard from Guha, Bharata was immersed in thought then and there.
The delicate, youthful, highly energetic and mightyarmed Bharata of graceful appearance, with shoulders like that of a lion and wideeyed like lotus petals, recovered for a moment and with a mind deeply distressed fell down at once like an elephant smitten by a goad.
Seeing Bharata in that state, Satrughna who was standing close by, smitten with grief clasped him, cried loudly and fell senseless.
Then Bharata's mothers, who were emaciated due to fasting and afflicted by the calamity of the death of their husband were desolate, rushed towards him.
Sobbing, they gathered around Bharata who had fallen on the ground, while Kausalya approached him in a depressed state and took him into her arms.
Desolate Kausalya, in deep distress, clasped Bharata out of filial love as if he were her own child, wept and enquired of him:
O son I hope you are not affected by illness. Now the existence of this royal house devolves on you.
O my son, with Rama gone to the forest along with your brother Lakshmana and with king Dasaratha departed from this world, I continue to live seeing you. From now on you alone are our sole protector.
O my son, I hope you have not heard any unpleasant news about Lakshmana or about my only son Rama who has gone to the forest along with his wife.
Highly renowned Bharata, composing himself for a moment and still weeping, reassured Kauslaya, and then said this to Guha:
O Guha where did my brother Rama, Sita and Lakshmana spend that night? What did they eat? On what couch did they sleep? Tell me all that.
Thereupon delighted Guha, overlord of the nishadas, told Bharata all that he had provided to Rama, his beloved friend and guest:
I offered Rama rice including a variety of eatables like fruits in great quantity for his food.
Rama whose prowess is his truth, acknowledged all that but remembering the duty enjoined on a kshatriya did not accept them.
O king that great Rama entreated us in a friendly manner by saying 'O friend we should always give to others but should never accept anything from others'.
Illustrious Rama along with Sita only drank the water brought by Lakshamana and  undertook fasting.
Thereafter Lakshmana also drank the remainder of water. Then all the three observing silence intently performed the evening worship.
Therafter, the son of Sumitra (Lakshmana) himself fetched darbha grass and quickly prepared an auspicious and comfortable bed for Rama.
Rama lay down upon the bed along with Sita. Thereafter Lakshmana, having washed their feet, moved to a distant place.
Here at the foot of the ingudi tree and upon that bed of grass both Rama and Sita rested that night.
Lakshmana, the scorcher of enemies, wearing protective covering for his palms and fingers (made of gohaskin), strapping on his back two quivers filled with arrows, holding a great bow, strung ready, stood sentinel throughout the night guarding the surrounding.
Then, holding the best of arrows and bow along with my indefatigable kinsmen similarly armed with bows, I stood by the side of Lakshmana guarding Rama who is comparable to Indra.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्ताशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightyseventh sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
After listening to all that Guha had said, Bharatha reached the foot of the ingudi tree accompanied by his ministers and gazing at Rama's bed, said to all his mothers the magnanimous Rama rested that night here on this ground in that crushed bed.
Rama, son of highly fortunate and sagacious Dasaratha, born of a noble lineage does not deserve to rest on this naked earth.
How could Rama, the best among men used to a bed made of a pile of excellent spreads and overspread with deer skin, sleep on the bare ground?
Rama, scorcher of enemies, one who was accostomed to dwell in the attic of sevenstoreyed mansions with floors paved with gold, and silver, spread with excellent carpets, decked with bouquets of flowers and perfumed with sandal and agaru. The peaks of those palaces were bright like towering white clouds and echoed with cries of  parrots. They were cool and fragrant with perfumes. The marvellous palaces made of golden walls are comparable to mount Meru. He used to wake up to the sounds of songs and musical instruments, the tinkling of finest ornaments and the splendid sounds of the drums. Many bards, genealogists and panegyrists singing befitting ballads and extolling his virtues at appropriate time used to salute him in reverence (Bharata lamented).
It is unbelievable that such a thing has happened to Rama in this world. It does not seem real to me and looks appears like a dream and my mind is bewildered.
Dasaratha's son, Rama had to rest on the ground would admittedly mean that no divine power is mightier than Time (Destiny).
Sita, daughter of Janaka, king of Videha, and beloved daughterinlaw of Dasaratha who caused delight to the beholder, too had to rest on the bare ground.
This is my brother's couch and it is here where he had tossed about. The grass spread on this hard surface is crushed by his limbs.
Some particles of gold dust are seen stuck to this bed here and there. I think Sita might have rested on this excellent bed with all her jewellery.
That the upper garment of Sita might have been caught here is well evident from the shining silken threads stuck.
Hapless Sita is young and delicate. Being a chaste lady, she, even in these (adverse) circumstances, does not feel the brunt. Hence, maybe she thinks her husbands' (hard) bed comfortable to her.
Alas, what suffering Because of a cruel man like me Rama along with his spouse was condemned to recline upon such bed like an orphan.
How could such Rama sleep on the ground? He was born in the house of emperors, worthy of reverence by the entire world and beloved of all the worlds, with the complexion of a blue lotus, with red eyes, and pleasing looks, one who deserves to be happy and not to suffer by renouncing the kingdom and excellent comforts.
Surely Lakshmana of great merit and auspicious virtues is fortunate since he is accompanying his brother Rama in times of adversity.
Sita has, indeed, accomplished her object by accompanying her husband (to the forest). Bereft of that magnanimous Rama, all of us are in doubt (if he will accept our services).
King Dasaratha having ascended to heaven and Rama taken shelter in the forest, this kingdom appears to me like a ship without a helmsman.
No one, even in thought, would ever desire this kingdom, protected by the strength of his arms even while residing in the forest.
Now the gates of our capital city (Ayodhya) are wide open. The city is unprotected and endangered. There are no guards to keep vigil over the ramparts. The horses and elephants are not in control (hence unprepared for battle). The army is unhappy and demoralised. At this state even the enemies will not like to seize the city, they will shun it like food mixed with poison.
From today onwards, wearing matted hair and clad in robes made of bark and living on fruits and roots, I too shall sleep on the naked ground or on grass.
Taking upon myself the vow of Rama, I too shall live in the forest cheerfully for the rest of the term on behalf of him so that his vow shall not prove untrue.
As I live in the forest on behalf of my brother Rama, Satrughna will live with me. My esteemed brother Rama will rule Ayodhya along with Lakshmana.
In Ayodhya the brahmins shall coronate Rama. Will the gods make this desire of mine true?
I will seek his grace in many ways by bowing down my head. Even then if Rama does not grant my wish, I shall also live with him as long as it takes. He will not be able to ignore a forester like me.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टाशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightyeigth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Bharata got up at daybreak after spending the night on the bank of the Ganga at that very place where Rama, the descendent of Raghu, had stayed. And said these words to Satrughna:
O Satrughna, blessings to you Why are you still alseep? Arise fetch Guha the king of the nishadas quickly. He will ferry the army across the river.
Urged by his brother Bharata, Satrughna replied 'I am not asleep. I am awake. I am deeply thinking of our esteemed brother, Rama'
While the two lions among men, Bharata and Satrughna were thus conversing with each other, Guha came in the appropriate time and said to Bharata with folded palms:
O scion of the Kakutstha race (Bharata) I trust, you and your army passed the night on the river bank comfortably without any inconvenience.
On hearing Guha's affectionate words Bharata, ever obedient to Rama, replied:
O king (Guha) the night passed comfortably for us. We have been honoured by you in many ways. Let your fishermen be ordered to ferry us across the Ganga in their boats.
Then at Bharata's command Guha returned to his habitation quickly and said to his relations:
Arise and awake. May you be ever blessed. Haul down the boats into the river. We have to ferry the army (across the river).
On hearing these words, they arose in haste and immediately brought five hundred boats from every direction in accordance with the command of their king (Guha).
They brought excellent boats known as Swastika, solidly built, they lookd magnificent, filled with large bells, sails and flags.
Then Guha personally brought an auspicious boat known as Swastika covered with white canvas and generating captivating sounds.
The family priest (Vasistha) and other brahmins were the first to board. Next mighty Bharata and Satrughna, Kausalya, Sumitra, women of the palace including the other wives of the king and wagons and supplies followed.
The clamour of the people setting fire to the temporary shelters in that camp, descending down the river and transporting the supplies into the boats reached the heaven.
Those boats adorned with flags were propelled by the fishermen occupying them. They sailed with men rowing on board fast.
Some boats were filled with women, some others with horses. while still others transported draught animals for drawing carriages and the great treasures.
Having reached the other bank, the men disembarked. While returning, the fisherfolk exhibited their craft of lovely formations.
The elephants, embellished with banners and goaded by their mahouts looked splendid like mountains with banners while crossing in the water.
Only some of the people were able to board the boats. Some others crossed on rafts and on large pots. Still others swam with their arms.
The auspicious army, ferried across the river Ganga by the fishermen, reached the great forest of Prayaga at the auspicious hour of Maitra.
The noble Bharata, got his army encamped according to their pleasure and set out, accompanied by his priests, to see the distinguished sage Bharadwaja.
Bharata, the knower of righteous ways and the best among men, saw the hermitage of Bharadwaja from a distance of one krosa and brought his entire army to a halt. He laid aside all his royal robes and weapons. Clad in silk garments, he went on foot along with his ministers, with the family priest Vasistha ahead of him.
Then the scion of the Raghu race (Bharata) halted his ministers within sight of Bharadwaja's (hermitage) and went along following his priest Vasistha.
On seeing Vasistha, the great ascetic Bharadwaja immediately left his seat and said to his disciples, Bring offerings of water.
After meeting Vasistha and greeted by Bharata, the radiant Bharadwaja could recognize he was the son of Dasaratha.
Offering them both in order arghya (welcomeoffering), water to wash their feet and fruits in accordance with the practice, he enquired Bharata about the welfare of the family.
He enquired about the welfare of Ayodhya, of the army, treasury, friends and the ministers. But knowingly did not mention about Dasaratha's wellbeing (the knew Dasaratha was dead).
Vasistha and Bharata also enquired about his health and welfare of his sacred fires, his disciples, animals and birds and trees of the hermitage.
Saying, all is well, the great ascetic Bharadwaja, out of his affection for Rama, said to Bharata:
Why have you come here when you ought to be ruling the kingdom? Tell me everything about this. My mind is not clear in this matter.
Rama, destroyer of enemies and enhancer of the delight of his mother Kausalya, has been banished to the forest for a long time along with his wife and brother. That illustrious one has been ordered by his father to live in the forest for fourteen years through the pursuasion of a woman. To enjoy the kingdom without obstacles do you intend to cause any harm to that irreproachable Rama and his brother?
At these words, Bharata, eyes filled with tears of grief, replied to Bharadwaja in a   stumbling voice:
When one so venerable like you too misunderstands me, I am gone. There is no danger for him from me. Do not rebuke me this way.
I do not approve of whatever my mother said in my absence. I am not happy with those words and I do not accept them.
I have come to worship the feet of Rama, the best of men and persuade him to return to Ayodhya.
O venerable one in consideration of the circumstances I am in, be kind to me and tell me the whereabouts of Rama, lord of the earth.
Likewise besought by Vasistha and other priests, the venerable Bharadwaja was pleased to tell Bharata:
O best of men (Bharata) your conduct towards the preceptors, your selfrestraint and devotion to the virtuous are all in keeping with those born in the race of Raghu.
I am aware of the feelings in your heart. Even then I enquired in order to confirm it  and to further your fame.
I know your brother who is conversant with righteousness is living on Chitrakuta mountain with Sita and Lakshmana.
O supremely sagacious prince gifted with the knowledge of kama (desire) and artha (wealth), tomorrow you go, but to night stay here with your ministers and fulfil my desire.
A man of liberal disposition, Bharata expressed his intention, saying, 'Be it so'. Then the prince made up him mind to spend the might in that hermitage. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे नवतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetieth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
With the decision of Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, to stay there for the night, sage Bharadwaja extended to him all hospitality.
Bharata said to Bharadwaja, You have already extended the hospitality in offering water for washing the feet with and of arghya befitting a guest as available in the forest.
Bharadwaja then said to Bharata with a gentle smile, I know you are full of love and content with whatever is offered you.
O Bharata, the best of men, I want to treat your army with food. This will please me and I hope you will act accordingly.
Why did you, O Bharata, the best of men, station your army at a distance before coming here? Could you not approach me along with your army?
With folded palms (in reverence), Bharata said to sage Bharadwaja whose penance was his wealth: I did not approach you with the army for fear of you, O venerable one.
O venerable one a king or a prince ought to intentionally avoid those places occupied by ascetics.
O venerable sage spirited horses, men and mighty rutting elephants follow me covering a wide expanse of land.
Lest the army should damage the huts, trees, land, and defile the water in the ashram, I came here alone.
Thus commanded the great ascetic, 'Let the army be brought here'. Accordingly, Bharata ordered the army to come.
Then Bharadwaja entered the fire sanctuary, sipped water and washed his hands with water and invoked Visvakarma to provide hospitality.
I intend to provide hospitality for which I am invoking Visvakarma and Tvastara who builds houses. Let adequate arrangements be made.
I invoke the three deities, guardians of the four quarters headed by Indra to extend hospitality (to Bharata). Let them make adequate arrangements in this regard.
Let the rivers flowing towards the east, and the west, flowing on the earth and in the sky, flowing everywhere reach here and now.
Let some rivers flow with liquor made of datepalms, some with wellprepared wine and some with cool water which tastes like sugarcane juice.
I invoke the gandharvas, Visvavasu, Ha Ha and Hu Hu, and also goddesses like gandharvas (heavenly musicians) and apsaras (nymphs) from all regions.
I summon also Grutachi, Visvachi, Misrakesi, Alambusa, Nagadantha, Hema and Hima whose abode is on the mountain.
I invoke all the women who attend on Indra and Bramha along with tumbur with all their (musical) instruments.
Let Kubera's divine forest situated in the land of Kurus, where leaves serve as raiment and ornaments and celestial women as its fruits come here.
Let the blessed Moon furnish me with excellent food of every kind -- solid, liquid, soft and those which are to be sucked and licked in great variety and quantity.
Let her furnish me with manycoloured garlands of fresh flowers from trees, wines and other drinks and meat of different kinds.
The valiant ascetic of incomparable lustre and power of penance in profound meditation said this in an accent in conformity with Vedic instruction.
As Bharadwaja with folded palms was thus meditating with his face turned eastward, all the deities appeared there one by one.
Meanwhile, soft auspicious and pleasant breeze passing over Malaya and Dardura mountains, comforting and cooling the sweat, began to blow.
Then divine clouds rolled in and showered celestial flowers. The sounds of heavenly gongs could be heard in every direction.
Gentle breeze began to blow. Troops of apsaras danced. Gandharvas and gods sang and the lyres rang.
That soft, melodious, rhythmic and wellmodulated sound entered the heaven and earth as well as the ears of all living beings.
When the celestial sounds pleasing to the ears of men had subsided, the army of Bharata beheld the wonderful creations of Visvakarma.
The ground was levelled on every side for five yojanas and covered with several grass lawns resembling lapis lazuli (blue sapphire) and cat's eye.
There the best of fruitbearing trees like bilva trees, woodapple trees, citrons, emblic myrobalan trees and mango trees laden with fruits sprang up.
From the forests of the northern Kuru kingdom, with all delights of heaven, a divine river with innumerable trees that grow on river banks came into existence.
Bright quadrangles, stables for elephants and horses, auspicious arch ways for palaces and mansions sprang up.
An auspicious royal palace with splendid archs resembling white clouds sprang up. It was sprinkled with celestial perfumes and adorned with beautiful garlands. That royal palace forming a quadrangle was furnished with couches, seats and carriages and furnished with celestial drinks of every kind, delicious food and splendid garments. It was stocked with food of every variety in clean and spotless vessels. Seats for every one and magnificent couches covered with excellent bedstead were arranged.
Longarmed Bharata, son of Kaikeyi entered that palace full of jewels with the permission of the great sage.
All the ministers, priests followed him and were glad to see the arrangement in that mansion.
There where stood an exquisite throne, a fan and a parasol Bharata stayed in the company of ministers.
He bowed in reverence and worshipped the throne (as though Rama were seated there). Taking hold of a fan made of yak's tail he sat in a minister's seat.
First the ministers and priests took their respective seats in accordance with their rank, and then the army chief and finally the supervisor of the camp.
Rivers filled with payasam (rice cooked in milk and sugar) in the shape of mud flowed towards Bharata at the command of Bharadwaja.
On both the banks of those rivers, charming, celestial houses plastered with white clay appeared by the grace of Brahma.
At that very moment twenty thousand women adorned with beautiful ornaments sent by Brahma presented themselves.
Twenty thousand women adorned with gold, gems and corals sent by Kubera came.
Troops of twenty thousand apsaras by whom any man when taken hold of in their arms could be intoxicated with intense passion, came from Nandana gardens.
There along with Narada, Tumburu and Gopa, distinguished kings of the gandharvas, looking bright like the Sun, began to sing in the presence of Bharata.
Thereafter, the apsaras, Alambusa, Misrakesi, Pundarika and Vamana danced near Bharata at the command of Bharadwaja.
The garlands of the gods available in Chitraratha's (Kubera's) garden could not match those obtained under the orders of Bharadwaja.
At the command of Bharadwaja, bilva trees acted as drummers, vibhitaka trees as cymbalists and the pipal trees as dancers.
Thereafter pine, palmyra, tilaka, and naktamala trees were transformed into hunchbacks and dwarfs and moved about in great delight.
Asohka, emblic myrobalan and all other trees found in the forest malati, mallika and jati creepers assumed the form of women, came over to the hermitage of Bharadwaja and said:
'O wine drinkers, drink as much as you can those who are hungry partake payasam and sacred meat'.
Every single warrior was attended by seven or eight women who applied oil and massaged his body and bathed him on the lovely banks of the river.
Some women with beautiful eyes quickly approached them for massaging. The  best of ladies wiped their bodies dry and gave each other wine to drink.
The attendants of draughtanimals fed the horses, elephants, donkeys, camels and oxen their appropriate food.
The draughtaimals of the illustrious warriors of Ikshvaku kings were urged by the highly energetic attendants to eat more and more of parched grain mixed with sugarcane and honey.
The horserider no longer recognised the horse or the mahout the elephant and the whole army was inebriated with drinking and pleasure.
All the armymen with their desires gratified and anointing their bodies with red sandal paste surrounded by apsaras exclaimed.
We will neither return to Ayodhya, nor enter Dandaka (forest). May Bharata and Rama be happy.
Having enjoyed the hospitality of Bharadwaja the foot soldiers, horse and elephant riders made utterances ignoring their leaders.
The exceedingly delighted soldiers of Bharata's retinue in their thousands cried out with excitement This is the very heaven.
Those thousands of soldiers wearing flower garlands ran about dancing, singing, and laughing.
Glancing at the ambrosial food, a desire arose in the minds of those soldiers to eat once again although they had already partaken it.
Messengers, maidservants, female attendants, and soldiers -- all of them in their thousands dressed in fresh garments felt exceedingly proud of themselves.
There the elephants, donkeys and camels, cows and horses and also beasts and birds were wellnourished. No one troubled the other.
In that army there was none who could be seen without wearing garments of sparkling white, who was hungry or dirty or with decayed hair.
There the soldiers beheld in amazement thousands of iron containers decked with flags and flowers and filled with white rice, mutton, pork, choicest condiments, fruit juice, fragrant and tasty soup.
Along the edge of the forest, wells were filled with thick payasam. There were wishfulfilling cows and honeydripping trees.
The wells were found filled with datepalm liquor and surrounded by pots of well cooked meat of peacocks, chicken and other animals.
There were thousands of pots, lakhs of plates, crores of vessels -- all made of gold and filled with wellgarnished food. Curd was kept in earthern pots like jugs and jars and pots with a wide mouth. Tanks were formed, some filled with white curd of good flavour and of the colour of woodapple, some with white curd blended with spices and some with payasam and heaps of barely powder mixed with sugar.
The soldiers saw on the river banks at landing places levigated powder, fragrant powder and extracts and other bathing requisites of different kinds stored in receptacles.
There the soldiers beheld on every side stacks of toothbrushing sticks, white and bristled, white lumps of sandal paste placed in dishes made of leaves, well cleaned mirrors, collection of clothes, several pairs of footwear, collyrium boxes, combs, brushes for cleaning moustaches, weapons, parasoles, bows and shining armour, different kinds of couches, and seats. There were pools of drinking water for donkeys, camels, elephants and horses and excellent landing places filled with flowering lotuses and water lilies. The lakes were of transparent waters resembling the hue of the sky easy and comfortable for swimming. There they saw heaps of soft grass as green as sapphire and kadamva trees for animals to refresh themselves under.
The men were amazed when they beheld the wonderful hospitality extended by maharshi Bharadwaja to Bharata, as if all this happened in a dream world.
As they were enjoying themselves in Bharadwaja's hermitage like the gods in the garden of Indra the night wore off.
Those rivers, the gandharvas and all those lovely women took leave of sage Bharadwaja and returned to where they had come from.
Bharata with his retinue received the hospitality and spent the night at Bharadwaja's ashram. Then he approached Bharadwaja on his own.
Seeing Bharata, the best among men, who stood with folded palms, sage Bharadwaja, who had just completed his firesacrifice, said to him:
O sinless one hope, you spent the night at our hermitage well? Tell me whether all your people enjoyed the hospitality?
Bharata saluted with folded palms the sage of great powers. And emerging from the hermitage, replied:
O holy one, I with my ministers and the entire army of men and animals passed the night happily. All our desires have been gratified by you.
All of us including the messengers were released from fatigue and heat. We were wellfed and wellhoused and the night was wellspent.
O venerable one O excellent of the ascetics I seek your leave. As I am proceeding to see my brother, bless me with a kindly look.
O knower of righteousness Tell me which path leads to the hermitage of that righteous and magnanimous one (Rama)? And how far is it (from here)?
Thus questioned, the great sage, brilliant Bharadwaja replied to Bharata who was yearning to see his brother:
O Bharata, three and a half yojanas from here in the lonely forest stands mount Chitrakuta, with its charming streams and woodlands
On its northern side flows the river Mandakini which is densely covered with flowering trees and lovely blossoming woods (on its banks).
O dear child, beyond that river lies mount Chitrakuta on which there is a hut made of leaves where, for sure, they both dwell.
O distinguished lord of the army, if you lead your army full of elephants, horses and chariots through the southern path or towards the southwest, you will come across Rama there.
When they heard about the journey, the wives of Dasaratha descended from their chariots worthy of them and stood around the brahmin, Bharadwaja.
Among them was Kausalya, trembling, emaciated and desolate, along with Sumitra.  They grasped the feet of sage Bharadwaja with their hands.
Kaikeyi with her unfulfilled desire and despised in all the worlds overcome with shame, also grasped his feet.
She reverently circumambulated that great and divine ascetic and stood not far away from Bharata with a sad heart.
Then Bharadwaja, firm in his vows, said to Bharata, I want to know about your mothers individually.
Thus asked by the sagacious Bharadwaja, Bharata, proficient in speech, replied with palms folded in reverence:
O venerable sage, this queen you are looking at, forlorn and emaciated due to grief and fasting, and who resembles a goddess is Kausalya, the principal queen of my father. As Aditi bore Dhata, she bore Rama, the best among men who walks with the powerful stride of a lion.
This lady plunged in grief, resembling the branch of a karnikara tree in the midst of the forest with blossoms withered and leaning on the left arm of Kausalya, is queen Sumitra, mother of two heroes, comparable to gods in beauty and possessing true prowess -- Lakshmana and Satrughna.
She is my mother Kaikeyi who is irascible, lacks the power of discrimination, proud, boastful of her beauty, ambitious of wealth, ignoble in the guise of a noble woman, wicked and intent on sinful acts. Behold her. You may know that because of her,  Rama and Lakshmana the best of men entered the forest which may cause their destruction and king Dasaratha attained heaven. She alone is the root of this great calamity that I am presently confronting.
Thus spoke Bharata, the best of men, with his eyes reddened and voice choked with sobs and  hissing like a king cobra.
Hearing the words of Bharata, the great sage, wise Bharadwaja replied with meaningful words:
O Bharata, you should not find fault with Kaikeyi. Rama's banishment will prove a great source of happiness in future (for mankind).
Banishment of Rama will bring about the welfare of the gods, the demons, and the sages of purified souls.
Having paid obeisance, the accomplished Bharata circumambulated sage Bharadwaja, look leave of him, and ordered his army to get ready.
Different groups of people intending to depart harnessed excellent horsechariots decorated with gold.
The male and female elephants wearing golden girths and decorated with pennants,  set forth with their bells sounding like thunderclouds at the end of summer.
Various types of costly carriages, large and small, set forth, while the infantry marched on.
The women headed by Kausalya, eager to see Rama, proceeded delightfully in distinguished carriages.
Magnanimous Bharata got into an auspicious palanquin of the splendour of the Sun and the Moon kept ready and proceeded amidst escorts.
That vast army teeming with elephants, horses and chariots proceeded southward spreading like a lofty cloud that had risen in the sky, traversing through the forests full of birds and beasts, passing through the mountains and streams on the other side of the river Ganga.
Bharata's army of soldiers, elephants and horses, all in high spirits, looked splendid while entering the forest full of frightening flocks of birds and beasts.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्विनवतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetysecond sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
On seeing the great army marching, the exited leaders of herds of elephants inhabiting the forest were frightened and ran off with their herds.
Bears, herds of dappled gazelle and antelopes could be seen everywhere in the stretches of the forest, also on the mountains and on the river banks.
Bharata the righteous son of Dasaratha, proceeded with great delight in the company of the clamouring army of four divisions.
The army of the magnanimous Bharata, resembling the waves of the ocean, covered the earth as the clouds cover the sky during the rainy season.
At that moment, a multiutde of swift horses and elephants spread out with great speed and the surface of the earth became invisible for a long time.
With his draught animals extremely wearied by covering a great distance, the majestic Bharata said to Vasistha, the best of counsellors:
Looking at these surroundings and from what I had heard, it is clear that we have reached the region indicated by Bharadwaja.
This mountain is Chitrakuta and this river, Mandakini. The forest shines from a distance like a blue cloud.
The enchanting ridges of mount Chitrakuta are now trampled by my mountainlike elephants.
The trees on the mountain ridges are shedding flowers, like dense blue rainclouds showering water at the end of summer.
O Satrughna, behold this mountain frequented by kinneras and abounding in animals like great crocodiles in the ocean.
Incited by the clamour of the army, these swiftrunning herds of deer expelled from their retreats resemble mass of clouds in the autumnal sky shattered by the wind.
Like the people of the south, the trees on the mountain ridges with branches, brilliant like clouds, are crowned with fragrant flowers as adornments.
This forest, dreadful in appearance was devoid of twittering of birds. But now it appears to me like Ayodhya thronged with people.
While the dust kicked by the hooves of the horses enveloped the forest, the wind, as if to please me, is quickly blowing them away.
Behold, O Satrughna, these chariots, commanded by excellent charioteers,  harnessed with horses are flying through the forest.
Behold, these lovely frightened peacocks and other birds hurriedly entering their nests.
Being the abode of ascetics, this region looks very charming like the pathway to heaven.
In this forest many a dappled deer with their mates looking as if painted with flowers are seen wandering about with a charming appearance.
Let the soldiers set out and properly search the forest till such time the best of men, Rama and Lakshmana, are found.
Hearing the words of Bharata, those valiant warriors with weapons in their hands entered the forest. Therafter, they observed a spiral of smoke rising.
Having seen the column of smoke, they returned and informed Bharata, saying, 'In a place bereft of men, fire cannot exist. Clearly Rama and Lakshmana must be here only.'
In case the two princes, Rama and Lakshmana, the best of men, and subduers of enemies are not residing here then evidently it must be some other ascetics like Rama.
Having heard these words acceptable to the pious, Bharata, the crusher of enemy forces, addressed the entire army:
All of you carefully watch here. Do not proceed any further. Sumantra, the preceptor and myself shall go forward.
At this command, all of them halted. Then Bharata fixed his gaze on the source of the smoke.
The army thus halted by Bharata, gazing at the space before them rejoiced at the thought that not long before they would rejoin their beloved Rama.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रिनवतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetythird sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Rama, resembling the gods, who had been living there for long developed a liking for the mountains and forests. With a desire to please Sita and his own mind, he showed her the wonderful Chitrakuta mountain as Indra did to his wife Sachi.
O gentle one, when I behold this lovely mountain, neither the expulsion from the kingdom nor being away from friends pains my mind.
O auspicious one, you may behold this mountin abounding in flocks of birds of every kind and its peaks adorned wtih minerals and as if piercing the sky.
This mountain with its peaks is adorned with various minerals. Some of the regions have the radiance of silver and bronze, some look bloodred or maddercrimson, some sparkle like the rarest of gems while others shine like topaz or crystal or a flower of ketaka plant or shimmer like stars and quicksilver.
This mount Chitrakuta is swarmed by flocks of birds and herds of several kinds of animals like tigers, panthers and bears of every kind giving up their cruel nature.
This mountain is spread over with various kinds of flowering trees and trees laden with fruits, shady and enchanting, mango, roseapples, asanas, lodhras, priyalas, jackfruit trees, dhavas, ankolas, lovely tinisas, bilva trees, tinduka and bamboo, kashmaya, arishta and varuna, madhukas, tilaka trees, badari and myrobalan trees, nipa trees, cane, danvas, and promegranate trees, the mountain looks splendid.
O auspiciouslooking one, behold these highspirited kinneras in pairs who are sporting on the picturesque hill plateaus causing thrills.
Behold the captivating sporting retreats of Vidyadharis, with their swords and best garments hung on the branches of the trees.
Behold a waterfall here and a fountain there gushing from the earth and in other places, the mountain looks like an elephant rutting ichor.
The breeze from the caves carrying the fragrance of many flowers is satisfying the sense of smell. Who will not find it delightful?
O flawless one, if I am to live here for many years to come with you and Lakshmana, no grief will consume me.
O lovely Sita, I am enamoured of this delightful mountain with its enchanting peaks laden with abundance of flowers and fruits and flocked by different kinds of birds.
By living in the forest I have achieved a twofold benefitdischarge of debt of my father with regard to righteousness and causing happiness to Bharata.
O Sita, are you enjoying by being with me here on this Chitrakuta and observing various objects gratifying to the body, mind and speech?
My greatgrandfathers and ancient royal sages used to say that living in the forest is like enjoying nectar for a king for the best existence after death.
Several hundreds of massive rocks of the mountain look splendid all around, in  blueblack, yellow, white and red colours.
Herbs in thousands on this king of the hills shine in the night with the splendour of  their own lustre, like flames of fire.
O lovely Sita Some regions of the mountain look like dwellingplaces, some others are like flowergardens and some are shining like a single rock.
This Chitrakuta mountain stands erect as if it has arisen by splitting open the earth and its peak looks graceful from every side.
Behold those excellent couches of lovers spread with leaves of kustha, sthagara, punnaga and bhurja and covered with lotus petals.
O Lady, behold those lotus garlands crushed and cast aside by lovers and also many fruits (tasted by them and) lying there.
This Chitrakuta mountain, with abundance of roots, fruits and water surpasses in beauty Vasvaukasara, the capital city of Kubera or Nalini, his celestial garden or the land of Uttarakuru.
O my beloved Sita, by spending time with you and Lakshmana following the path of the virtuous with utmost restraint and by enhancing the righteousness of my race, I shall obtain great felicity.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुर्नवतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetyfourth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Then Rama, the lord of Kosala, descended from the mountain and showed Sita the charming river Mandakini of sacred waters.
Lotuseyed Rama said to the heavyhipped daughter of the king of Videha, whose face resembled the beauitiful Moon.
Look at this enchanting river Mandakini with its variegated sandbanks frequented by geese and swans and adorned with lotuses.
See this river sparkling with trees of every kind laden with fruits and flowers growing on its banks. Everywhere it resembles the lake Nalini of Kubera.
The herds of deer have just drunk water by descending down the landing places and the waters are still turbid. This sight produces great pleasure in me.
O my beloved rishis with matted locks and wearing deer skins and bark of trees as upper cloth bathe in the river Mandakini for performing morning ablutions in time.
O largeeyed Sita, some other ascetics of rigid austerities worship the sungod according to tradition, lifting up their arms and invoking the Sun.
With the trees whose tops are swayed by the wind, the mountain was as if dancing, shedding leaves and flowers all around the river.
Behold this river Mandakini whose waters here are transparent like crystals, there sparkling with sand dunes and elsewhere crowded with siddhas.
Look at the scattered heaps of flowers shaken off by the wind and large quantities of flowers floating on the waters.
O my auspicious Sita, sweetvoiced Chakravaka birds singing in most pleasant tones are alighting on those heaps of flowers.
My lovely Sita, I consider watching this mount Chitrakuta and river Mandakini in your presence more delightful than living in Ayodhya.
The waters of river Mandakini is perpetually agitated by siddhas who are endowed with asceticism, selfrestraint and tranquillity and who are cleansed of sins by taking bath in the river. Plunge with me into this river.
O lovely Sita, like a companion plunge into this river Mandakini, submerging the red and white lotuses, and enjoy sporting.
O my lovely lady Always think this river Mandakini as Sarayu and this mount Chitrakuta as Ayodhya and these wild animals as its inhabitants.
With righteous Lakshmana obedient and you, O Sita, agreeable to me, you both bring me great pleasure.
Bathing thrice in your company at the time of prayers and partaking honey, roots and fruits, I do not yearn either for Ayodhya or for the kingdom.
With this enchanting Mandakini teeming with herds of deer, whose waters are drunk by elephants, lions and monkeys, decorated with heaps of flowers fallen from the trees in full bloom, who will not feel happy and free from fatigue.
Rama, the perpetuator of the Raghu dynasty, describing the river Mandakini at length appropriately in this manner, wandered in the company of his beloved consort on mount Chitrakuta looking black like collyrium.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चनवतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetyfifth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Rama showed Sita, the princess of Mithila the river Mandakini flowing in the mountain, gratified her by offering meat (to eat) and sat on the mountain slope.
Offering Sita several kinds of preparations to eat, righteous Rama, seated in her company remarked, This meat is savoury, this meat roasted on fire is sacred.
Now as Rama was sitting there, the tumult and the dust raised by the approaching army of Bharata reached the sky.
Meanwhile, the mighty leaders of the elephantherds were agitated, and frightened by the loud noise, fled away from there in different directions.
Rama heard the sound generated by the army and saw those leaders of herds fleeing away.
Seeing those animals fleeing and hearing the clamour, Rama addressed Lakshmana,  son of Sumitra, who was blazing with energy.
O Lakshmana, the worthy son of Sumitra, fearful and tumultuous clamour like rumbling sound of clouds is heard. What a wonder Go and see.
Herds of elephants and buffaloes in the great woods and wild beasts frightened by lions are running in different directions.
O Lakshmana, do ascertain if any king or prince has come for hunting or whether any ferocious animal has entered this forest, shouldn't you?
O Lakshmana, this mountain is highly inaccessible even to birds. Find out exactly and quickly what this is all about.
Lakshmana hurriedly climbed a flowering sala tree, surveyed in all directions and fixed his gaze on the east.
Turning his face to the north, he beheld a vast army consisting of chariots, elephants and horses and a wellequipped infantry.
He (Lakshmana) informed Rama about the army full of horses and elephants and decorated with chariotbanners and said these words:
O noble one, put out the sacred fire (Agnihotra) and let Sita take refuge in the cave. String your bow and keep the arrows ready. Put on your armour.
Rama the best among men replied to Lakshamana, Oh, Lakshmana, look properly and tell me to whom do you think this army might belong
Hearing the words of Rama, enraged Lakshmana, like a flaming fire as if he would reduce the army to ashes, replied:
It is evident that Kaikeyi's son Bharata, who has been consecrated, is coming to slay both of us desiring the prosperous kingdom (to be without obstacles).
There on that chariot, is a banner shining brilliantly with the emblem of a lofty majestic Kovidara tree with a large trunk.
There the emblem of the great Kovidara tree of very large trunk spread with many branches shines brilliantly atop the chariot.
These men mounted on swiftlymoving horses are following the post. The riders of elephants  mounted on the elephants look cheerful.
O mighty warrior, let both of us take up the bows and station ourselves on this mountain or we shall stay here itself armed with weapons fully prepared for the battle.
O Rama, will this Kovidara emblem come into our possession in the battle? Can I see Bharata, the cause of the calamity that has befallen you, Sita and me?
O that mighty warrior Bharata, on whose account you have been banished from the perpetual kingdom, comes here as a foe and as for me, he deserves to be slain.
O Rama, I do not see anything  wrong in slaying Bharata. In killing one who had done harm is not an act of unrighteousness.
O Rama, Bharata has abandoned righteousness and has harmed you. When he is slain, you shall rule over the whole earth.
Let that Kaikeyi, greedy for the kingdom, see in great anguish her son who shall be slain by me today in a battle like a tree felled by an elephant.
I shall also slay Kaikeyi with her attendants and relations. Let the earth be cleansed of the great sin today.
O protector of honour, today I shall vent my suppressed anger and dishonour on the enemy's army like a fire on the thicket.
Today I shall rend the bodies of enemies with my sharpened arrows and spatter the forest of Chitrakuta mountain with their blood.
Let the wild beasts drag away the elephants, horses and men to be killed by me with their hearts transfixed with my arrows.
Having slain Bharata and his army in this great forest, I shall doubtless discharge my debt to my arrows and bow. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षण्णवतितमस्सर्गः।Thus ends the ninetysixth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Thereafter, Rama pacified Lakshmana, son of Sumitra who was violently agitated. He said to him who had swooned with rage:
When sagacious Bharata of great strength has come here, where is the need for a bow or a sword or a shield.
O Lakshmana, having sworn that I would make father's word true, what shall I do with the kingdom earned slanderously by slaying Bharata who has come (to see me)?
I shall never accept any wealth obtained by destroying kith and kin or friends which is akin to taking food prepared with poison.
O Lakshmana, on the oath of righteousness, I wish wealth and pleasure as well as this kingdom for the sake of you all.
O Lakshmana, I desire this kingdom only for the unity and happiness of my brothers. I swear on the weapon I hold.
O gentle Lakshmana, lordship of this earth with the sea as its garment is not difficult to obtain (for me). But I do not desire even Indrahood by unrighteous means.
O protector of honour even if there were to be some happiness which I could enjoy without you, Bharata, and Satrughna, let it be reduced to ashes by fire.
O best among men, O valiant one I think Bharata who is affectionate towards his brothers and who is dearer to me than my life, must have returned to Ayodhya and has heard that I had been exiled along with you and Janaki, wearing barks and matted locks. Remembering the duties of the race with an afflicted mind and with agitated senses he has come here to see me. He has not come with any other intention.
Auspicious Bharata, angry with Kaikeyi and having spoken to her unpleasant, bitter words and having propitiated our father, has come here to offer me the kingdom.
Finding the time appropriate, Bharata has come to see us. Even in his mind he would have never thought of causing any harm to us in any way.
Why are you suspicious of Bharata? Has he done anything disagreeable to you any time in the past?
You must not speak any harsh or unpleasant words against Bharata. If you do, they will be deemed to be directed against me.
Whatever be the calamity, O Lakshmana, how will sons slay their father, or a brother kill his own brother who is as dear to him as his own life?
If you are saying all these words only for the sake of the kingdom, then I shall ask Bharata when I see him to offer this kingdom to you.
O Lakshmana if I earnestly exhort Bharata to offer this kingdom to you, then on hearing those words, he would say, 'Certainly so'.
Having heard the words uttered by his brother, Rama of virtuous disposition, Lakshmana who was devoted to his brother's welfare, shrank.
Hearing the words of Rama, Lakshmana was abashed and said I think it is our father, king Dasaratha who has come here personally to see you.
Observing Lakshmana's abashment, Rama said I think the mightyarmed king Dasaratha has come to see all of us here.
Or rather having thought of the adversities of dwelling in a forest and also by realising  that both of us are accustomed to comforts, I think he has certainly come to take us back home.
Our father, the prosperous Dasaratha, after withdrawing this princess Vaidehi who is brought up in luxury from the forest (to Ayodhya), will return.
O valiant warrior, you can see those two splendid horses of high pedigree, charming, swift and equal to wind in speed are shining (in the army).
There is that huge and aged elephant named Satrunjaya which belogns to our sagacious father proceeding at the head of the army.
I do not see, O longarmed one that splendid white canopy of my father, wellrespected by men. And this gives rise to doubts in my mind.
Get off the treetop, O Lakshmana, and do what I say said the righteous Rama.
Lakshmana, the conqueror of foes, descended from the top of the sala tree and stood by the side of Rama with folded palms.
Let not the hermitage be crowded commanded Bharata, and the army encamped  around the mountain.
Bharata's army full of horses, elephants and chariots covering a distance of more than one and a half yojanas encamped by the side of the mountain.
The army brought by Bharata, the great moralist, was shining around Chitrakuta mountain following dharma, and casting off all pride, in order to please Rama.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तनवतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetyseventh sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
On encamping the army, lord Bharata, the best among men, wished to approach on foot Rama who was devoted to his father.
After the army encamped in the assigned places, Bharata said to his brother Satrughna thus:
O dear Satrughna, you should explore this forest quickly along with groups of our people and  hunters as well.
Let Guha, surrounded by a thousand kinsmen and armed with bows, arrows and swords look for Rama.
'I myself shall go on foot surrounded by ministers, citizens, preceptors and brahmins and search the entire forest.
'I shall not rest in peace until I see Rama, powerful Lakshmana and illustrious princess of Videha (Sita).
I shall not attain peace until I see my brother, Rama whose auspicious countenance looks radiant as the Moon and whose eyes as lotuspetals.
Peace shall not come to me until I hold on my head the feet of my brother, the insignia of royalty.
I shall not attain peace until Rama, who is worthy of this kingdom, is sprinkled with the holy water of coronation and assumes the ancestral kingdom.
Lakshmana, one who beholds the highly effulgent countenance of Rama, resembling the spotless Moon and whose eyes resemble red lotuses, is blessed indeed
Sita, the illustrious daughter of Janaka and princess of Videha, has accomplished her purpose by following Rama, the lord of this earth bounded by the ocean.
Like Kubera in the Nandana garden, Rama lives here on mount Chitrakuta which is indeed blessed like the Himalaya, king of the mountains.
Fortunate is this inaccessible forest which is inhabited by wild animals to have become the dwelling place of the most radiant Rama, the foremost among the wielders of weapons.
Having said thus, the best of men, mightyarmed and highly energetic Bharata entered the great forest on foot.
Bharata, the best among the eloquent, made his way amidst multitude of trees grown on mountain slopes with their tops in full bloom.
Having reached a flowering sala tree atop Chitrakuta mountain, he beheld a lofty banner of smoke rising from the fire burning in Rama's hermitage.
On seeing the smoke, majestic Bharata in the company of relatives concluded that Rama was staying there and rejoiced like a man who had reached the other bank of the river.
Having heard of Rama's hermitage on the Chitrakuta mountain inhabited by pious men, magnanimous Bharata, commanded his army to stay at a distance, and quickly proceeded with Guha.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टनवतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetyeighth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Eager to see his brother, Bharata encamped the army and set out showing the hermitage to Satrughna.
Bharata, deeply devoted towards elders, indicated to sage Vasistha to bring along the mothers, and  proceeded ahead quickly.
Sumantra, who was overeager, like Bharata, to see Rama, followed Satrughna who was not far from him.
While walking, Bharata beheld a hut made of leaves looking like a hermit's cottage.
In front of that hut Bharata beheld shattered logs of wood and also flowers plucked.
Bharata beheld here and there knots of kusa grass and strips of bark tied on trees as signs to ascertain the way to the hermitage of Rama and Lakshmana.
He also beheld large heaps of dried cakes of dung of buffaloes and deer for use against cold in the forest.
Walking on, the longarmed, effulgent and delighted Bharata said to Satrughna and the ministers surrounding him:
We must have reached the region about which Bharadwaja had spoken. I think river Mandakini is not far from here.
Here are long bark garments fastened on lofty places as marks of identification left by Lakshmana, to locate the path at odd times which may be needed while going out.
This must be the place on the hillside on which mighty tuskers wander about trumpeting and charging at one another.
Here is the thick smoke emanating from the blacktrailed fire maintained perpetually by the ascetics living in the forest.
I shall see here with a delighted heart the venerable Rama, the best of men, who renders great hospitality (to elders) and who resembles a maharshi.
Bharata walked for a short distance towards mount Chitrkuta when he reached river Mandakini. And then said to his ministers:
Rama, the lord of men, a tiger among men, is sitting on the ground in a 'heroic' (yogic) posture in this secluded forest. O fie upon my birth and my life
Effulgent Rama, the lord of the world, had to renounce all desires and undergo this calamity of living in the forest on my account.
Reviled by the world, I shall now fall at the feet of Sita, Rama and Lakshmana seeking their grace.
Lamenting in this way Bharata beheld in that forest an excellent, sacred and enchanting hut covered with a lot of leaves of sala, palmyra and aswakarna trees like a sacrificial altar spread with soft kusa grass. Goldplated bows that resembled the thunderbolt of Indra, powerful and capable of achieving great targets and oppressing the enemies, adorned the hut. Arrows glittering like the rays of the Sun, were dreadful, with blazing heads and stored in quivers adorned it like the hooded serpents illumining the city of Bhogavati (in the nether world). A pair of swords in scabbards made of excellent silver, two shields of different colours with golden spots, fingerguards made of skin of iguana decorated with gold were hanging there. It was impregnable to enemy hordes like the cave of a lion to the deer.
Bharata beheld at Rama's residence a sacred and spacious altar sloping to the northeast, with a burning fire upon it.
Bharata looked around for a moment and saw his esteemed brother Rama seated in that thatched cottage wearing matted locks of hair.
He saw Rama, lord of the oceanbound earth, seated like blazing fire, clad in antelope skin and garment of bark, with long arms and shoulders like a lion and eyes like white lotuses. The mightyarmed warrior seemed like Brahma, the creator and the eternal, protector of righteousness. Accompanied by Sita and Lakshmana Rama sat on the bare ground strewn with darbha grass.
Beholding Rama, Bharata the majestic and righteous son of Kaikeyi overwhelmed with grief and distress rushed towards him.
On seeing Rama, Bharata could not control his grief with patience and lamented in great anguish and with words choked with tears said:
My elder brother who deserves to be attended by ministers and other subjects in the royal assembly sits here today in the forest surrounded by wild beasts.
Such magnanimous Rama, a follower of dharma, accustomed to be attired in  thousands of dresses in the past now clad in two deer skins, is practising righteousness.
How is it that Rama who used to wear variegated flowers formerly, now bears these heavy matted locks?
That Rama, who in accordance with tradition deserves accredition of religious merit through sacrifices now seeks it through mortification of body.
How is it that the body of my venerable brother which was once smeared with expensive, fragrant sandal paste is now covered with dust?
It is on my account that Rama who was accustomed to all comforts has fallen into this misfortune. Fie on my life of cruelty which is condemned by the world.
Thus Bharata lamented in misery and with his lotuslike countenanace sweating  before reaching Rama's feet fell down, crying in distress.
Mighty prince Bharata, oppressed with grief, could only say, O Arya (venerable one) And in distress could not speak any more.
As he beheld the glorious Rama, with his throat choken with tears, he cried out, O Arya (venerable one) and thereafter, was unable to speak any more.
Satrughna also prostrated himself at the feet of tearful Rama who embraced both of them.
Thereafter, princes Rama and Lakshmana joined Sumantra and Guha in the forest like the Sun and the Moon meeting the planets Sukra and Brihaspati in the sky.
On seeing the princes now assembled in the great forest like mighty leaders of elephant herds, inhabitants of the forest had nothing but tears of grief, not joy, to shed.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetyninth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Rama beheld Bharata with matted locks and robes of bark fallen down on the ground with folded hands like the Sun at the time of dissolution of the world. It was really difficult to look at him.
Rama found it extremely difficult to recognise Bharata with his emaciated body and pallid face. He held him in his arms and lifted him.
Born in the race of Raghu, Rama embraced Bharata and kissed him on his forehead. Placing him on his lap, he enquired thus with a composed mind:
O dear, now that you have come to the forest, where is our father king Dasaratha? You ought not come to the forest while he is living.
You have come a long distance (from Ayodhya) to this forest, O Bharata It is a pity,  dear brother, to see you after a long time, so emaciated. What brings you to the forest?
My dear (brother), now that you have come here, I trust, king Dasaratha is keeping good health and hope, he has not departed prematurely in despondency for the other world.
O gentle one, being young and inexperienced, I trust, you have not forfeited the kingdom for ever. Dear child, I trust, you are looking after father whose prowess is his truthfulness.
I trust king Dasaratha, who is true to his promise, a performer of Rajasuya and Ashwamedha sacrifices and a firm adherent of righteousness is in good health.
O dear child I trust, the family preceptor of the Ikshvakus, Vasistha, the brahmin (versed in the Vedas), who is learned, ever fixed in virtues and effulgent is being honoured as usual.
Dear child I trust, Kausalya and Sumitra, mothers of an excellent progeny are happy. I trust, the noble queen Kaikeyi is happy too.
I trust, you continue to honour the family priest (Suyajna, son of Vasistha) who is endowed with modesty, born of high family, conversant in scriptures, free from envy and who can give you directions with regard to your duties.
I trust, the sagacious priest who knows ritual precepts, who is upright and is employed to take care of your sacred fires, informs you always regarding what was offered and what is to be offered as oblation at appropriate time.
Dear brother, I trust you continue to pay homage to gods, father, mothers, teachers, relations equal to your father, aged people, physicians and brahmins.
I hope you treat with respect Sudhanva who is equipped with the most formidable arrows and other weapons propelled by mantras and a master in the science of statecraft.
I hope, dear brother, you have appointed men who are brave, learned, selfcontrolled, of noble birth and skilled in guessing from hints.
O Bharata the wellguarded advice of ministers, learned in scriptures and capable of proper counselling, is the root of victory for kings, specially when the advice is kept in confidence.
I trust you are not under the grip of sleep but wake up at appropriate times, I hope you always think of the means of judicious statecraft during the last part of the night.
I hope you neither decide alone nor discuss with many. I trust a decision once made by you is not leaked in the kingdom.
O Bharata, having determined on an endeavour involving a little effort and yielding great results, I trust you commence to execute it quickly without procrastination?
I trust, other kings come to know of your endeavours only when your endeavours suceed or about to succeed. I hope, efforts intended to be made in future are not revealed to them beforehand.
Dear brother, I hope others are not able to understand your determination or those of your ministers, either by conjecture or by inference or through other means without being revealed either by you or by your ministers.
I hope by setting aside a thousand fools, you prefer a single wise man. A wise man will be of immense help in difficult situations.
Even if the king seeks the assistance from thousands or tens of thousands of fools, they cannot render any help to him.
A single clearsighted minister who is prudent, brave and skilful can bring about great prosperity to a king or a prince.
I hope you have employed highly competent servants for important tasks, mediocre servants in mediocre tasks and low people in inferior tasks.
I hope you are assigning ministers, who are unyielding to bribery and other temptations, holding positions hereditarily and who are full of integrity and eminence, with superior tasks.
Are not the citizens of your kingdom agitated at severe punishment meted out to them reproaching your ministers?
Just like a performer of sacrifice scorns at an outcaste or a woman scorns at a lustful lover, do the subjects not scorn you for collecting taxes more than what is due?
A learned person but skilled in contrivances, a warrior with passion for wealth and a man ever engaged in corrupting the minds of servants must be slain. A king who does not kill them is himself killed in due course.
I trust you have appointed a man who is cheerful, brave, sagacious, steadfast, honest, of a good family, loyal and efficient as the army chief.
I trust you honour and respect those prominent soldiers who are courageous, powerful, skilled in war and who have proven heroic exploits.
I trust you distribute rations and wages to your army in due time without making delay.
It has been mentioned in the scriptures that if provisions and wages are not paid in stipulated time, the dependent attendants will be incensed with their masters and will turn hostile and become corrupt, leading to great calamity.
I hope all men of a good family, especially those who belong to our race, are loyal to you and are ready to sacrifice their lives for your cause.
O Bharata, I hope you have chosen as your envoy an expert born in your own country, wellinformed, skilful and quick to understand one who repeats and reports (exactly) what has been told.
I hope you collect information (of their secret efforts) intelligently through unrecognisable spies with three of them closely watching each of the eighteen officials (there are eighteen categories of officials in a kingdom) of the enemy's side and fifteen (officials) on your side.
O slayer of foes, I hope you are always alert about your foes who were defeated by you and have come back. You should not ignore your enemies thinking they are weak.
Dear brother, I hope you do not serve those brahmins who are atheists, who foolishly think of this world alone and fancy themselves as learned. They only bring disasters.
While principal scriptures do exist, these superficial fellows take resort to the science of logic based on abstract reasoning, and indulge in futile talks.
My dear brother I trust you are protecting the (impregnable) city of Ayodhya worthy of its name, formerly defended by our heroic ancestors, with its sturdy gates, its elephants, horses and chariots, its thousands of venerable, selfcontrolled and highly energetic brahmins, kshatriyas and vaisyas engaged in their respective professions, filled with palaces of various kinds, abounding in learned people and a prosperous city where everything is available in abundance.
O Bharata, my country which is marked with hundreds of sanctuaries near villages where life of the people is made comfortable, where there are shrines, water distribution facilities and tanks, which is wellploughed and rich in cattlewealth, free from violence and independent of rain. It is enchanting. It is safe from wild animals. With fears expelled, free from sinful people, adorned with mines and wellprotected by my ancestors, it is prosperous and I hope people are living comfortably.
I trust all those men who live on agriculture and cattlerearing are favourable to you. The world's prosperity, dear brother, grows on the profession of cattle rearing.
I trust you nourish them and also afford portection and prevent adversities. A king must protect all those people living in his country in accordanc with righteousness.
I trust, you keep the women pacified and wellprotected, you do not believe their words and do not divulge any secrets to them.
I trust, you protect the habitat of elephants and you have a large number of milch cows. I trust you are not contented with the existing number of female and male  elephants and horses.
O prince, I trust, you rise early daily and present yourself welladomed to the people on the thoroughfare.
All the servants, I trust, do not present themselves to you directly. At the same time they do not remain out of sight with fear at a distance. The middle course is the best way for the welfare of every one.
Hope all the forts are adequately provided with wealth, foodgrains, weapons and water, with machines of war and craftsmen and archers.
O Bharata, I trust, your revenues are abundant and expenditure much less. I trust you do not give away your treasure to undeserving persons.
I trust, you are spending only on gods, ancestors, brahmins, guests, warriors and hosts of friends.
I trust a man who is honest, purehearted and venerable, falsely accused of adultery is not slain out of avarice without consulting experts in scriptures.
O best among men I trust that a thief, caught redhanded and interrogated and has sufficient proof is not set free, out of greed for money.
O Bharata, I trust that your ministers are wellinformed and look into all matters in times of hardship pertaining to whether a man is rich or poor without any bias to either.
O Bharata, the tears falling from the eyes of persons, who are falsely accused and punished for the pleasure of the king will destroy his progeny and cattle as well.
O Bharata, I trust you wish to thrive by treating the old, children and foremost of learned people with the three expedients namely gifts, affection and kind words.
I trust you pay homage to the preceptors, the aged ones, ascetics, gods and guests, to shrines and to accomplished brahmins.
I trust, righteousness for the sake of prosperity or prosperity for the sake of righteousness or both for the sake of sensual pleasure are not thwarted by you.
O Bharata, the best among the victorious, conversant with timely actions and a bestower of boons you are the best of men. I trust, you allocate adequate time for attending to all the three expedients of life like dharma, artha and kama.
O highly sagacious Bharata, those brahmins who can comprehend the meaning of all scriptures along with the inhabitants of the city and country, I trust, are seeking your happiness.
I trust you eschew the fourteen faults of kings, like atheism, falsehood, anger, inattention, procrastination, evading the wise, indolence, gratification of all five senses, planning alone in the affairs of the kingdom, consultation with people who are proficient in worthless acts, failure to implement decisious, inability to keep the counsel secret and omission of auspicious practices and setting out against all the enemies at a time.
O highly sagacious Bharata, I trust, having understood their true nature you are appropriately following the ten, five and four divisions, the seven divisions, the eight divisions, the three divisions, three kinds of knowledge, victory over the senses, the six qualities, evils arising from destiny and human agency, kritya, division of twenty, similarly Prakriti and Mandalas and two sources of Yatra and chastisement and of peace and war.
I trust you deliberate in secrecy on your counsel with three or four counsellors, together and separately with each one, as laid down in sacred texts.
I trust, the Vedas you have studied are fruitful, the acts which you commenced are productive, your wife is fruitful (blessed with a son) and the scriptures you studied are useful.
O Bharata, I trust your intellect is in conformity with what I said conducive to long life, and fame in accordance with righteousness, (legitimate) pleasure and prosperity.
I trust, you walk the auspicious path of truth (virtue) followed by our father and forefathers.
O Bharata, I trust you do not partake delicious food all by yourself, and you share it with your friends when they want it.
The highly sagacious and learned king, having acquired the entire earth and punishing the people in accordance with tradition and righteously ruling the kingdom, will ascend the his release (from this world).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे शततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the hundredth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
On listening to Rama, Bharata replied Of what use shall be these royal duties to me, when I have fallen from righteousness?
O best of men there is an ancient tradition in our race that the younger son cannot become king when the eldest is there.
Therefore, O scion of the Raghu race, return along with me to prosperous Ayodhya and for the good of our race get your self coronated.
Other think the king to be a human, but to me, he is divine since his conduct and the statecraft are superhuman as they are in conformity with righteousness.
While I was in Kekaya and you took refuge in the forest, venerable king (Dasaratha), who was always engaged in sacrifices and was held in high esteem by the virtuous, ascended to heaven.
As soon as you set out for the forest along with Sita and Lakshmana, the king, overwhelmed with grief, attained heaven.
Arise, O best of men and offer libations to our father. I and Satrughna have already done so.
O son of Raghu's race, it is said that whatever is offered by a dear son becomes eternal in the world of manes. You alone are the beloved son of our father.
Your father, deprived of you, brooding over you, wishing to behold you, unable to divert his mind fixed on you, remembering you alone and immersed in sorrow departed (from this world). इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोत्तर शततम स्सर्गः।।Thus ends the hundredone sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Having heard the words of Bharata regarding the death of his father, Rama became unconscious.
On hearing the thunderlike words spoken by Bharata afflicting the mind, like the thunderbolt hurled by Indra (enemy of demons) in a battle, Rama, the scorcher of enemies, stretching forth both his arms, fell down on the ground like a tree with flowering tops severed by an axe in the forest.
Those brothers on all sides, with Sita lamenting, sprinkled water on Rama, the great archer and lord of the earth who, afflicted with grief, had fallen down on the ground, and was lying like an elephant exhausted from repeatedly striking a river bank.
On regaining consciousness, shedding tears profusely, Rama again started speaking piteously.
On hearing that his father, king Dasaratha, the lord of the world had attained heaven, righteous Rama said to Bharata in conformty with his rightful conduct.
What shall I do in Ayodhya now that my father has followed the path ordained by the gods? Who will rule that Ayodhya deprived of that best of kings?
I could not even perform the last rites of that magnanimous one who died of grief on account of me. What use is my life with an unlucky birth?
O irreproachable Bharata, it is gratifying that you and Satrughna are indeed fortunate to have fulfilled your cherished desire since the king was wellhonoured by you with all the obsequial rites.
Even after the completion of my exile I do not wish to return to Ayodhya which is directionless, bereft of its chief, the king.
O subduer of enemies, when father has gone to the other world, who will guide me in Ayodhya after I complete my term of exile?
On seeing my good conduct our father used to say comforting words to me. Now from whom can I hear such words pleasing to the ears?
Having thus spoken to Bharata, Rama, overwhelmed with grief, approached his wife Sita whose face looked like the full Moon, and said to her.
O Sita, your fatherinlaw is dead. O Lakshmana, you are deprived of your father. Bharata is relating to me the sad news that king Dasaratha has attained his heavenly abode.
While the scion of the Kakutsthas was saying thus, copious tears welled up from the eyes of all those illustrious sons of Dasaratha.
All the brothers, having consoled Rama as best they could, told him, Let the libations be offered to our father, the protector of the world.
On hearing that her fatherinlaw, king Dasaratha, had attained heaven, Sita, her eyes filled with tears could not look at her husband in the face.
Having consoled Sita, daughter of Janaka, griefstricken Rama said to Lakshmana who was also distressed with grief.
I shall go and offer libations to my magnanimous father. Go and fetch the dried pulp of ingudi fruit and an upper garment made of bark.
Let us proceed in this order -- you first, Sita second and I last. This procession  in mourning is terrible indeed.
Thereafter, their constant follower Sumantra who was conversant in spiritual knowledge, a highminded person, softnatured, selfcontrolled, tranquilminded and staunchly devoted to Rama consoled him. Holding the hands of the princes, Sumantra helped their descent into the auspicious river Mandakini for taking bath.
The illustrious brothers approached with great difficulty the swiftflowing and enchanting river Mandakini which had convenient descent and endowed with forests always in bloom. They descended at an auspicious place that was not slushy and offered libations of water saying 'O father, let these offerings be yours'.
Rama, the ruler of the earth, held water with both palms cupped and, facing the south, the direction of Yama (the god of death) said these words, sobbing:
'O best of kings, you are gone to the world of the manes, and let this inexhaustible libation of pure water reach you'.
Then, the powerful scion of the Raghu race reached bank, from the bathing spot of the river Mandakini along with his brothers and offered pinda (an offering of rice flour to the departed) to his late lamented father.
Placing the balls of ingudi pulp mixed with badari fruit on a spread of darbha grass, Rama, was overcome with grief and weeping, said:
O great king, we offer you such food as we partake now. Be pleased to accept it. For,  his gods are offered the food a man takes.
Rama, the tiger among men, ascending the riverbank and proceeding on the same path (he had come), climbed the (Chitrakuta) mountain of charming slopes.
Rama, lord of the earth, reached the door of the leafhut and took Bharata and Lakshmana in his arms.
The mountain echoed with the sound of lamentations of all the brothers along with Sita which resembled the roar of lions.
The soldiers of Bharata were alarmed on hearing the tumultuous sounds raised by those mighty brothers offering libations of water and lamenting.
They said, 'Bharata must have joined Rama. That loud noise must be their wailing over their deceased father'.
Then all of them left their camps with one single thought (of seeing Rama) in their minds and ran in the direction from where that sound emanated.
Some rode horses, some, elephants, while others mounted welldecorated chariots, while the young went on foot.
The whole multitude of people at once rushed towards the hermitage wishing to see Rama as if he had left long ago though he had gone on exile very recently.
Eager to see the union of brothers, all those people went by every sort of vehicle filled with the sounds of hooves and wheels.
The earth crushed by several vehicles, hooves (of horses) and wheels (of chariots) emitted tumultuous sounds like the sky in the gathering stormclouds.
Frightened by the sound, the elephants followed by their females, spreading all the way the odour of the ichor, moved to other forests.
Hearing that sound, hosts of boars and deer, buffaloes, serpents and apes, tigers, antelopes with ears like the cows', gavayas as well as dappled antelopes were all frightened.
Ducks, watercranes, geese, karandavas, cranes, male cuckoos and kraunchas fled senselessly in different directions.
The sky was filled with birds frightened by the sound and the earth covered with people. Both looked extremely beautiful.
All at once the people saw the illustrious Rama, the best of men, and the subduer of enemies squatting on the bare earth.
All those men with faces full of tears, reproaching Kaikeyi and Manthara (all the way), approached Rama.
Thereafter, beholding those people deeply afflicted, their eyes full of tears, Rama embraced them as if they were his own father and mother.
Rama embraced some, while others paid him obeisance. Therafter, he honoured his erstwhile companions and relations in accordance with their status.
The weeping and the tumult of those magnanimous people made the earth, sky, mountaincaves and all quarters reverberate incessantly like the beating of drums.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्व्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the hundred and second sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Longing to see Rama, Vasistha, headed by the wives of Dasaratha, set out on foot (where Rama was offering libations).
The wives of the king while proceeding slowly towards the river Mandakini beheld the bathing place frequented by Rama and Lakshmana.
Kausalya, with eyes filled with tears and her face emaciated, addressing Sumitra and the other wives of the king sadly said:
This is a sacred place to the east of the forest used by the unfortunate Rama, and Lakshmana of untiring energy and Sita expelled from the country and undergoing suffering.
O Sumitra, your son Lakshmana, free from laziness, always carries water from here for the sake of my son.
Your son, though engaged in servile tasks (like bringing water), is not to be held contemptible because all the services intended for the benefit of his brother are prompted by virtue.
This your son unaccustomed to, and undeserving of, any suffering may now give up this mean and distressing duty entrusted to him.
That largeeyed Kausalya beheld the cakes of ingudi pulp placed by Rama for his father on a spread of darbha grass whose blades pointed toward the south.
Seeing the pinda (edible offering made to the departed soul) placed on the ground for his father by the distressed Rama, queen Kausalya, addressing all the wives of Dasaratha, said:
Have darsan of this pinda offered by Rama according to tradition to his magnanimous father, Dasaratha, lord of the Ikshvaku race.
I do not think that this is an appropriate food for that godlike and great lord of the earth who enjoyed all luxury.
How can Indralike Dasaratha, having ruled the earth bounded by four oceans, eat a cake of ingudi pulp?
Rama (who was once) highly prosperous, had to offer the cake of ingudi pulp to his father. Nothing appears more painful to me than this in this world.
Seeing the offering of cake of ingudi pulp by Rama to his father, how is it that my heart does not break into a thousand pieces in sorrow?
The wellknown saying in this world is that 'whatever food a man partakes, his gods also partake the same'. This dictum appears true (now).
The cowives, having thus consoled the distressed Kausalya, went to the hermitage. There they beheld Rama who looked like a god dislodged from heaven.
Beholding Rama devoid of all luxury, his mothers afflicted with grief, and overcome with sorrow, cried aloud, tears streaming down.
Rama, the best among men and true to his promise, rose and touched the auspicious feet of all his mothers (in reverence).
Those largeeyed queens, their palms with delicate fingers and with auspicious hands with a pleasant touch, wiped the dust from the back of his body.
On seeing his mothers, Lakshmana, too, was overcome with grief and with devotion followed Rama and slowly bowed to them with reverence.
All the queens treated Lakshmana, born of Dasaratha and endowed with auspicious qualities, with the same love as they did to Rama.
Sita, too, overcome with grief, grasped the feet of her mothersinlaw and stood before them, her eyes full of tears.
Like a mother to her daughter, Kausalya embraced the wretched Sita, who was afflicted with sorrow, and emaciated due to her stay in the forest, and said to her:
How is it that Sita, daughter of Janaka, king of Videha, daughterinlaw of Dasaratha and wife of Rama, has to undergo such hardships in the lonely forest.
O Sita, after looking at your countenance, which is like a lotus, scorched by the sunshine, or like a withered waterlily or gold defiled by dust or the Moon obscured by the clouds, the fire of sorrow is burning my mind. The grief in my mind is like fire kindled from the arani (sacrificial faggots) that consumes its own souree. (On a circular wood piece, a wooden stick is placed and churned to produce fire specially in sacrifices is called arani.)
While Rama's mother was uttering such words in anguish, Rama reached Vasistha and clasped his feet with reverence.
Rama touched the feet of the family priest Vasistha, a man equivalent to effulgent fire like Indra, the lord of the gods, does to Brihaspati and sat down along with him.
After Vasistha and Rama sat down, righteous Bharata sat close to his elder brother. Behind him sat his companions, leading citizens, soldiers and righteous men.
Beholding Rama attired like an ascetic but radiant with a majestic glow, the extremely valiant Bharata sat near him with folded palms like the great Indra purified by religious austerities sits near Brahma, the creator.
All noble people were truly filled with great curiosity as to what Bharata was going to speak, after paying his homage and honouring Rama.
Rama who was steadfast in truth, Lakshmana of great dignity and righteous Bharata surrounded by their friends were as resplendent as three sacrificial fires encircled by officiating priests.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्य्रुत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the one hundredthird sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Rama with his brother Lakshmana having consoled Bharata who is ever devoted to elders began to question:
I want to hear what brought you to this region with your barkrobes, matted locks and antelope skin.
What made you come to this region, leaving the kingdom and wearing deer skin and matted hair? You should tell me everything.
Thus enquired by the magnanimous Rama, Bharata, joining his palms tightly, replied:
O my revered sire our mighty father, having performed an impossible task of banishing you to the forest, and tortured by grief due to separation from his son,  went to heaven.
O Rama, tormentor of enemies having been instigated by a woman, my mother Kaikeyi, committed this great sin of destroying his (Dasaratha's) reputation.
My mother, formented with grief and with the fruit of the kingdom forfeited, and cursed with widowhood, will fall into the dreadful hell.
It behoves you to grant  me a favour. I am like your servant. Now get yourself coronated in the kingdom like Indra.
All these subjects and your widowed mothers have come to you. It behoves you to grant them this favour.
O bestower of honour by the law of primogeniture and as a worthy successor it is appropriate that you should accept the kingdom righteously and fulfil the desire of your friends.
Like an autumnal night with the immaculate Moon, let this entire earth cease to be a widow by securing you as her lord.
With my head bowed down, I beseech you along with all these ministers to show favour to me who is your brother, disciple and slave.
O best among men, it does not behove you to transgress the prayers of the whole order of subjects and ministers to assume this hereditary and perpetual order.
Having said thus, the mightyarmed Bharata, in accordance with tradition, grasped with tearful eyes the feet of Rama again with his head.
Rama embraced his brother Bharata who repeatedly heaved sighs and resembled an elephant in rut, and said:
How can a man like you, born of a noble race, endowed with energy, powerful and adherent to vows, commit a sin for the sake of a kingdom?
O destroyer of enemies, I do not find even slightest fault with you. Like a child, it does not behove you to reproach your mother.
O sagacious and sinless one, it is laid down (in sastras) that elders when married can always act at their free will towards their wives and sons.
O handsome one, you should treat us the way the virtuous treat their wives, sons and disciples in this world.
O handsome one, king Dasaratha is alone competent to accommodate me in the forest wearing bark robes and antelope skin as garment or install me in the kingdom.
O best among the protectors of righteousness the honour shown to our father who is conversant with the ways of righteousness and much revered by the world ought to be shown towards our mother also.
O Bharata, I have been commanded by our righteous father and mother to go to the forest. How can any one act otherwise?
You shall rule the kingdom wellhonoured by the people in Ayodhya and I shall live in Dandaka forest wearing bark as garments.
The maharja of great radiance made this division in the presence of people and after commanding thus, ascended heaven.
The proclamation of that righteous king revered by the world shall be your guide. You should enjoy that portion bestowed by father.
O handsome one, as for myself, I shall enjoy the portion bestowed on me by my magnanimous father and shall take refuge in the Dandaka forest for fourteen years.
I think what my great father, who is honoured by all men, and an equal to Indra, ordered is for my highest welfare. The will of the overlord of the world should not be done away with.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुरुत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the one hundredfourth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
That night passed off painfully for the four lion like brothers as they lamented, surrounded by their hosts of friends.
When the night dawned, those brothers surrounded by their friends made (morning) ablutions and, after the prayers, returned to Rama.
All of them sat together silently and no one uttered a word. Bharata alone from among  them addressed Rama saying:
This kingdom was given to me for the satisfaction of my mother. I am bestowing it back on you. Enjoy it without any obstacles.
Like a dyke bursts under pressure by the great surge of waters during the rainy season, this vast kingdom cannot be sustained by any one except yourself.
O lord of the earth as an ass cannot follow the pace of a horse or a bird, the pace of Tarkshya (Garuda), I do not have the capability to follow you.
O Rama, the life of a man on whom others depend for their sustenance is a happy life and the life of one who depends on others for his own mintenance is miserable.
O mightyarmed Rama, a man plants a tree, rears it till it grows into such a large tree with a big trunk that it becomes difficult for a dwarf to climb. When the tree flowers but does not bear fruit, the man who planted it gets no pleasure out of the purpose for which the tree was planted. Being a mighty protector, do not chastise us who are your servants. This is a simile. You may better comprehend its implications.(The meaning of the simile is that if you do not assume the throne, the desire of our father, who nurtured you right from your childhood and hoped that one day you will become king and rule the people, will be in vain.)
O great king and subduer of enemies, may all the leading guilds of traders and other subjects behold you all over installed in the kingdom like the resplendent Sun.
O Rama, let the elephants following you, intoxicated with ichor, be heard trumpeting. Let the women of the inner apartment rejoice with composed minds (when they hear of your return).
Hearing the words of Bharata beseeching Rama to return, various classes of people of the city of Ayodhya, in approbation exclaimed well said.
Having seen the illustrious Bharata lamenting that way, Rama, a man of firm determination and selfpossession, consoled him thus:
A man is neither independent nor competent to do any act on his free will. Fate pulls him this way or the other.
All accumulations of wealth deplete at the end. Every man who attains elevated positions falls at the end. Every union culminates in separation. Every life ends in death.
The only fear of a ripened fruit is the fear of falling down (from the tree). In the same way every man who is born has no other fear except the fear of death.
Even a house constructed with sturdy pillars gets dilapidated and ultimately decays. In the same way people under the sway of old age and death are destroyed (at last).
A night that once passe off does not return like the waters of river Yamuna that flow into the ocean filled with water (the water do not flow back into Yamuna).
The passing days and nights quickly decrease the life span of all living beings in this world, like sunrays drying up the water in summer.
Whether you are static or moving, your lifespan decreases. Therefore, you should only grieve about yourself and not for any one else.
Death follows a man wherever he goes. When he sits, death sits with him. Even after travelling a very long distance, the man returns along with death.
Wrinkels form on the body and hair turns grey in old age. In this way, decayed with age, what can a man do to have control over death.
People rejoice when the Sun rises and rejoice when the Sun sets. But they are                unaware of the decline of the life span of their own.
At the advent of each new season men feel delighted to see the newly blossomed flowers and fruits. But with the change of the scasons the life span also diminishes.
In a mighty ocean, two pieces of logs meet one another, float together and in due course get separated. In the same way wives, sons, relatives and riches remain together for some time and thereafter get separated. Their separation is certain.
No living being in this world can act as he likes. Therefore, no one should grieve for the dead.
Like a man standing on the wayside says to a passing caravan, 'I am following you', and follows them, the road taken by our fathers and forefathers is certain for every one and cannot be violated by a person treading that path. (So) why should a man grieve?
Like the flow of water which never reverts to its source, age passes. Therefore, a man must employ his self in righteous acts that bring him happiness. By doing so, it is said, people will always be happy.
Our righteous father and lord of the earth, Dasaratha, attained heaven by giving abundant charities and performing several sacrifices in accordance with tradition.
Our father nourished his dependents, splendidly governed his subjects and accepted  wealth through righteous ways. Because of these pious acts, he could go to heaven.
Dasaratha, our father and lord of the earth, reached heaven by performing auspicious acts and offering abundant charities in sacrifices.
King Dasaratha, lord of the earth, having performed various kinds of sacrifices and securing a long life, enjoyed abundance of pleasures and attained heaven.
O dear our father, king Dasaratha, who was honoured by the virtuous and enjoyed the best of pleasures attained heaven after a long life. Therefore, he is not to be grieved over.
Our father, king Dasaratha, abandoned the wornout mortal body, and obtained divine prosperity of wandering in the world of Brahma.
No one like you or me should ever mourn about this highly sagacious and learned king who was proficient in scriptural knowledge.
A wise man, holding on to his fortitude in all circumstances, should avoid such occasions of grief, these words of lamentation and this crying.
O foremost of the eloquent, compose yourself. Do not grieve. Return to the city (Ayodhya) and reside there. You have been commanded so by our father who was a man of selfcontrol.
I shall also stick to the command of our noble father who was a man of sacred deeds.
O subduer of enemies, I cannot violate the order of the king. You also must respect it for he is our father and friend indeed.
O Bharata, I will, therefore, obey the command of our venerable father, the champion of righteousness, by living in the forest.
O best of men, if a man aspires to conquer the higher world, he should remain  virtuous, compassionate and obedient to his preceptors.
O best of men, having seen the auspicious life of our father Dasaratha and his conduct, you also stick to your own duty.
Rama, the magnanimous lord, addressed his younger brother Bharata with words full of significance, saying, Obey father's command and remained silent in a moment.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the one hundredfifth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Rama remained silent after saying these meaningful words on the bank of river Mandakini. Then the Bharata, conforming to righteousness, replied in clear words to the virtuous Rama who was affectionate by nature.
O subduer of enemies, you are of such nature that neither sorrow pains you nor pleasure delights you. There are none in this world like you. You are loved by the elders, for you seek their counsel whenever you have doubts.
One should accept life and death, vice and virtue equally. How can one be afflicted when he has gained such an intellect?
O lord of men, it is not proper for a person like you who knows the past and the future of human beings to feel distressed and lament over it.
O magnanimous Rama, your nature is divine and you are true to your promises. You are omniscient, allseeing and wise.
It is not proper for a virtuous man like you, who is cognizant in matters of life and death, to be overwhelmed by such insufferable grief.
When I was away from home, my meanminded mother committed a sin for my sake which I never wished. You may pardon me graciously.
I am bound by a bond of righteousness for which I am unble to slay my mother who deserves severe punishment for her sinful acts.
How shall I, born to Dasaratha of noble race and righteous deeds, with the knowledge of dharma, do such a reprehensible and unrighteous deed?
King Dasaratha, my father and preceptor, is godlike to me. Devoted to meritorious acts, he departed from this world in his old age. For this reason, I cannot reproach him (publicly) in this assembly (of men).
O Rama, conversant with righteousness, will any one who knows the meaning of righteousness, do such a sinful act contrary to dharma and artha to please a woman?
There is an ancient saying that at the time of death, the intellect of people is deluded. By conducting himself in this way, king Dasaratha has proved it.
Our father has trangressed righteousness due to anger or delusion or recklessness. Therefore, you may think over the matter prudently and set it right.
One who sets right the wrongs done by his father is a true son. Otherwise the son becomes just the opposite. (He is not  a son to the father).
So be a worthy son and let not the sinful act committed by our father and condemned by men of wisdom be approved by you.
Protect this entire kingdom, Kaikeyi, me and father, our friends and relations, citizens of the city and inhabitants of the countryside.
Where is the forest and where is kshatriya's duty? Where are matted locks and where is governance of the kingdom? It does not behave you to do such acts antithetical to each other.
O sagacious one, the primary duty of a kshatriya is to be crowned. This enables him to rule his subjects.
Will any kshatriya, setting aside his first duty, follow an uncertain course of piety which is contrary to his dharma and whose impact may be felt in a remote future.
If you so desire to follow the path of dharma acquired out of physical exertion, then bear the trouble of governing the four castes of the social order righteously.
O Rama, you are the one who knows his duty. The knowers of dharma maintain that the life of a householder is the foremost among the four modes of life. How can you renounce it?
Being younger to you in knowledge, position and birth, how can I rule the earth when you are present?
I am a child, deficient in intelligence and virtue and even inferior in position. Deserted by  you, I do not wish to live.
O one, conversant with righteousness rule unhindered this entire kingdom along with our relations inherited from our father.
Let all ministers, subjects, and priests including Vasistha who are wellversed in Vedic hymns consecrate you here itself.
After consecration, you too return to rule Ayodhya along with all of us like Indra who went back (to heaven), accompanied by Maruts after conquering all the worlds with his prowess.
Discharging completely the three debts, to gods, to ancestors and to sages, subduing your enemies and gratifying your friends, you alone (have the right) to dictate me.
O my esteemed brother let all your friends be delighted today at your enthronement and your enemies flee in terror in ten different directions.
O best of men, wiping out all the censure on my mother, redeem our revered father from sin.
I beseech you with my head bowed low, show mercy on me and every one of our relations, like Maheswara showing compassion on all living beings.
If you turn your back on my solicitations and set out for the forest I shall also go along with you from here itself.
Thus besought and propitiated by Bharata with his head bowed low and distressed, the virtuous lord of the world, Rama, firmly established in the words of his father, resolved not to go back to Ayodhya.
Having seen the wonderful deternmination of Rama, people were, at once, anguished and delighted, anguished because he would not return to Ayodhya, and delighted because he was firm in his resolve.
All the priests, the chiefs of merchant organizations and mothers who had their senses switched off and theif tears drained dry extolled Bharata for his words. All of them, reverentially saluting Rama, implored him.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षडुत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the one hundredsixth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Wellhonoured in the midst of relatives, the celebrated Rama, elder brother of Lakshmana, then said to Bharata who was going to speak again.
Appropriate are the words spoken by you born to the celebrated king Dasaratha through Kaikeyi.
Earlier when our father was to wed your mother, O dear brother, he had promised to your maternal grandfather that he would confer (on her) a kingdom with good revenue.
Thereafter in the battle between gods and demons, the able king (Dasaratha) pleased  (with your mother) granted her a boon (as a token of gratitude).
Thereafter, O tiger among men, your illustrious mother of fair complexion, under oath demanded of that best of men, king Dasaratha, the two boons, namely kingdom for you and banishment for me. Bound by such agreement (oath), the king granted her the boons.
O best of men, that is why I have been ordered by father to live in the forest for fourteen years as per the (condition of the) boon.
I have come to this lonely forest accompanied by Lakshmana and Sita, bent upon upholding the truth of our unrivalled father's words.
O Indra among kings, let your coronation be performed without delay since you are worthy and at the same time the truthfulness of our father's words be honoured.
O Bharata, release for my sake the competent king from his debt (of vow) and honour the righteous father and the mother as well.
Dear (brother), it is heard that long ago an illustrious king while performing a sacrifice intended for ancestors at a sacred place known as Gaya, the sacrificer Gaya chanted a Vedic hymn as follows:
Putra is so called as he delivers his father from a hell known as Put and protects the ancestors in all possible ways.
One should desire many virtuous and learned sons so that at least one of them may go to Gaya (to perform the father's obsequies).
O enhancer of the king's delight, O best of men rajarsis have decided this way. You may, therefore, O lord, protect your father against hell.
O valiant Bharata, go to Ayodhya accompanied by Satrughna and the twiceborn (brahmins) and keep the subjects delighted like pleased (with your rule).
O king (Bharata) I shall also enter the Dandaka forest without delay in the company of only these two -- the princess from Videha (Sita) and Lakshmana.
O Bharata, be the king of men. I shall also become the supreme king of the wild beasts in the forest. Go now happily to Ayodhya, the best of cities, and I shall enter Dandaka forest with delight.
Let an umbrella protect you against (scorching) sunshine and provide its cool shade over your head, O Bharata As for me, I shall happily seek the shade of these dense woodland trees.
O Bharata, intelligent Satrughna will be your support and son of Sumitra (Lakshmana) as is wellknown will remain my best friend. All four of us, worthy sons of Dasaratha, shall follow the path of truth of our father. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the one hundredseventh sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
While Rama, conversant with dharma, was consoling Bharata, Jabali an eminent brahmin addressed him in words contrary to righteousness.
Very well, O scion of the Raghu race, you are nobleminded and highsouled. You, like a common man, must not entertain such nonsensical thought.
Who is whose friend? who is to get what and from whom? Man is born alone and will die alone.
O Rama one who establishes relationship by saying, 'She is my mother he is my father' is to be regarded as a lunatic. In fact, no one belongs to any one.
A man who goes from one village to another takes rest somewhere on the way and the next day leaves the place and proceeds on his journey. Similarly, father, mother, home and wealth are restingplaces to a man. The wise do not get attached to them, O descendant the Kakutsthas
O most virtuous of men, you ought not to abandon this patrimonial kingdom, adopt a course, which is painful, difficult and full of thorns (dangers). This (course) is unwise and unworthy of you.
Go back to that prosperous city of Ayodhya and get yourself coronated. That city is a chaste woman wearing a single braid of hair awaiting you, her lord.
O king's son, enjoy inestimable royal pleasures in the city of Ayodhya like Indra in heaven.
Dasaratha was nobody to you and you are nobody to him. That king is one person and you are another. Therefore, do what I tell you. (It does not matter what you are to him and what he means to you).
For a living being, the father is only a drop of white blood (semen). During her menstrual period this is blended in the mother's womb due to which a man is born in this world.
That king (Dasaratha) has gone to the place where he ought to go. Such is the nature of mortals. You are fruitlessly undergoing difficulties.
I prity those who yearn for dharma and artha and not for other things since those who have experienced adversities in this world (disregarding their own interest), will be ultimately destroyed any way by death.
People perform ashtaka ceremony for the spirits of ancestors and offer them food. Look at the amount of food being wasted. Will the dead (ever) eat food?
If something eaten by one in this world can enter the body of another, then a shraddha can be performed for a person who has set out on a distant journey. Will that offering turn into food for him on his way?
It was to induce people to give charity that treatises are composed by intelligent men exhorting, 'perform sacrifices', 'give charity', 'be initiated', 'practise religious austerities', 'renounce', etc.
O highminded one thinking that the next world does not exist, practise whichever is evident and perceivable. And turn your back on what is beyond perception.
Honour the decision of the wise that serves as an instance to all and accept the kingdom offered by Bharata with pleasureइत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the one hundredeighth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hearing Jabali's words, Rama, the foremost among the truthful, gave a rejoinder, exercising his own judgment and firm conviction with due respect (to Jabali).
Althoug what you have said appears to be salutary, it is actually unwholesome. It appears to be beneficial but is really detrimental.
A man not bound by morality, engaged in evil deeds and conducts himself contrary to good character is not respected by the virtuous.
It is only the character that tells whether a man is highborn or not, brave or only proud of his manliness, honest or dishonest.
If like a man who appears noble, though ignoble, clean, though unclean or dishonest, auspicious, though inauspicious, a man of character, though depraved, I forsake auspicious ways for unrighteousness, abandon pious acts and scriptural practices and indulge, under the cloak of dharma, in acts of wickedness by causing harm and confusion to the world, will any sensible man with a sense of discrimination between should and should not hold me in high esteem?
How can I advise others for a virtuous conduct or how can I attain heaven if I break the vow which I follow at present.
The entire world conducts itself as per its own sweet will. Therefore the subjects will follow the same path as their kings.
Truth and nonviolence are the perpetual principles of kings. Therefore, a kingdom is based on truth. This world is firmly established in truth.
Sages and gods all accept truth (as the supreme virtue). A truthful man of this world, attains the highest state (abode).
People are frightened at the sight of a man speaking untruth as though they have seen a serpent. Truth in this world is the greatest virtue and is said to be the very foundation of heaven.
Truth is God. The goddess of wealth always takes refuge in truth. Truth is the root of everything. It is supreme and there is nothing above it.
Charity, sacrifice, libations, mortifications, asceticism and the Vedas have truth as their foundation. Therefore, every one should be an adherent of truth.
One protects the world. Another runs his family. One plunges into hell. Another is honoured in heaven. (These are the fruits of truth and untruth).
I am always true to any promise. I am bound by truth. Why shouId I (now) disobey  my father's command (to keep his promise)?
I am always true to my promise. I will not break the bridge of truth of my father out of either greed or delusion or ignorance or illusion.
We have heard that the offerings of a man inclined to untruth, of an unstable and unsteady mind are accepted neither by the gods nor by the ancestors.
I personally regard this righteousness practised by the virtuous as an evident form of truth, as the supreme self. Therefore, this burden (difficult task of living as an exile) is gratifying to me.
I renounce the socalled kshatriya code of conduct followed by the mean the cruel, the greedy and by men of evil deeds which is unrighteousness under the cloak of  righteousness.
At first a man conceives an evil idea in his mind, then executes it through evil deed with his body and tells a lie through his tongue. Thus sinful action is three dimensional (mental, physical and vocal).
Land (kingdom) glory, and wealth pursue a man, they long for him even if he is in heaven. Therefore, every one must take recourse to truth alone.
The course you thought excellent and 'this auspicious act' you urged me in a cleverlyworded statement to perform is ignoble indeed.
Having sworn before my father that I would live in the forest, how can I act upon Bharata's request in disregard to my father's words?
I had taken a firm vow in the presence of my father (about my stay in the forest). And then Devi Kaikeyi was immensely delighted.
I shall spend the term of my forest life with faith and holiness and purity of mind and  with regulated food and with ancestors and gods satisfied with offerings of roots, flowers and fruits, with my five senses contented and with a mind that discriminates between what ought to be done and what ought not to be done.
Having reached this land of (religious) actions, one should perform auspicious rites. As fruit of their actions, Agni, Vayu and Soma have obtained their status.
After performing a hundred sacrifices, king of the gods (Indra) obtained (dominion over) heaven. Great sages attained heaven after resorting to intense mortifications.
The highly energetic prince, Rama, could not tolerate these atheistic arguments of Jabali for which he had to utter these words full of disdain:
The virtuous maintain that truthfulness, righteousness, valour, compassion towards all beings, speaking pleasing words, paying homage to gods, brahmins and guests -- all these are  paths to heaven.
Therefore, brahmins who have rightly understood the meaning of righteousness and adopt, with unmost care, the righteous ways as laid down in the scriptures seek attainment of higher positions.
You are a great atheist, you have fallen from the path of righteousness. You are guided by an intellect which is extremely peridous. I, therefore, disapprove of my father's decision in inducting a man like you (into the council of ministers).
Just as a thief, so is the Buddha (a wise men). Know that the Tathagatas are atheists. They are men most distrusted among the people. A learned man should avoid atheists.(Note:  Verses 31 to 39 appear to be interpolations, It is anachronistic to talk about Buddha in Tretayuga.)
Men superior to you in preceding generations had conquered this world and the other world by always performing many auspicious acts. Twiceborn brahmins perform religious acts and offer libations for the welfare of the world.
Those supreme  ascetics who are radiant, devoted to righteousness and associated with men of virtue, with charity as their chief virtue, eschewing violence and purged of their impurities are truly worthy of reverence in this world.
Having heard the wrathful words of the magnanimous Rama of fearless intellect, that brahmin (Jabali) thus humbly replied in palatable, truthful words full of faith (in god).
I do not speak the language of atheists. I am not an atheist. I do not say that the next world does not exist. In keeping with time (occasion) I shall speak the language of a believer or a nonbeliever.
O Rama, since the appropriate time has slowly come, I have uttered this. In order to persuade you to return and to propitiate you I have said these words. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे नवोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the one hundredninth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Seeing Rama angry Vasistha intercedes, saying that Jabali is wellaware of the exits and entrances of humans on earth.
O lord of the worlds, Jabali had spoken all this only with the intention to make you return (to Ayodhya). Listen I shall (now) relate to  you the origin of the world.
At the beginning, all this was water from which the earth was created. Thereafter, the selfexistent Brahma along with the gods came into existence.
Then he assumed the form of a boar and uplifted the earth and created this world   with his progeny of purified souls.
Eternal, changeless and imperishable Brahma arose from space and to him was born Marichi and to Marichi, Kasyapa.
Kasyapa begot Vivaswat (the Sun) and Vivaswat, Manu. This Manu was the first  Prajapati to him whom was born Ikshvaku.
Manu had orginally bestowed the most prosperous earth on Ikshvaku and you know  Ikshvaku was the first king of Ayodhya.
Ikshvaku had an illustrious son, wellknown as Kukshi and to Kukshi was born the heroic Vikukshi.
The son of Vikukshi was highly energetic and powerful Bana and to him was born the mightyarmed Anaranya of great renown.
When Anaranya, the best of the virtuous, was ruling the kingdom, there was no drought, no famine and not even a thief (in his kingdom).
Mightyarmed king Prithu was the son of Anaranya and Prithu was father of the great king Trishanku. That heroic Trishanku, on account of his truthfulness ascended the heaven with his physical body.
Trishanku's son was illustrious Dundhumara, father of the exceedingly powerful Yuvanaswa.
Majestic Mandhata was Yuvanasva's son and father of mighty Susandhi. Sudsandhi had two sons Dhruvasandhi and Prasenjit. Renowned Bharata, slayer of enemies, was the son of Dhruvasandhi.
Mightyarmed Bharata had a son named Asita against whom the Haihayas, Talajanghas and the indomitable Sasibindus, the rival kings rose as enenmies.
Although king Asita engaged all of them in a battle, he was (defeated and) driven into exile. He retired to a delightful, tall mountain and lived a life of contentment of a sage.
Both his wives became pregnant. It is said that one of them gave the other poison (with the motive) to destroy the embryo.
O queen, you will beget a son who will be magnanimous, virtuous, renowned in the world. He will be the perpetuator of the race and destroyer of enemies.
The queen was happy. She circumambulated the sage, took leave of him and came back home. Thereafter, she gave birth to a son who had eyes like lotus petals and who looked resplendent like Brahma.
With a motive to destroy the embryo her cowife had poisoned her. That child was born with gara or poison for which he was called  Sagara.
The king Sagara performed a sacrifice on the fullmoon day. And swiftly dug the ocean that frightened the people.
We have heard that a son, Asamanja by name, was born to Sagara. For his sinful deeds he was banished by his father while he was still alive.
Valiant Anshuman was the son of Asamanja and the father of Dilipa. Dilipa's son was Bhagiratha.
To Bhagiratha was born Kakutstha, by whom your race is wellknown. A son Raghu was born to Kakutstha and hence all of you are known as Raghavas.
The illustrious son of Raghu became famous in the world under the names of  Kalmasapada and Sowdasa. The curse of a sage turned him a devourer of men for some years.
Shankhana was the famous son of Kalmashapada. Whoever challenged his prowess was routed  with his entire army.
The son of Shankhana was the glorious Sudarshana, father of Agnivarna. Shighraga was the son of Agnivarna whose son was Maru. Maru's son was Prashushruva and to Prashushruva was born splendid Ambarisha. Nahusha of indisputable prowess was the son of Ambarisha whose son was the supremely righteous Nabhaga. Nabhaga had two sons, Aja and Suvrata and Aja's son was the righteous king Dasaratha.
Being the eldest son of king Dasaratha and widely  known as Rama you happen to be the  heir apparent. Hence, O king, accept the kingdom and look after the people.
Vasistha, the family priest, continued to speak to Rama on righteousness.
Every man born has three preceptors. They are his teacher, father and mother.
O best of men, the father brings forth a son. The teacher imparts him wisdom. Therefore, the teacher is considered superior.
I was preceptor to your father and also to you. O destroyer of foes, by following my words, you will not transgress the path of the virtuous.
All these learned men, guilds of merchants and the twiceborn (brahmins) of this assembly are your men. By fulfilling your duty towards them, you will never swerve from the path of the virtuous.
Here is your aged and righteous mother. It does not behove you to deny your service to her. By obeying her, you will never deviate from the path of the virtuous.
O scion of the Raghus whose strength springs from truth and righteousness, if you accede to the prayers of Bharata, you will not ignore the call of your soul.
When Rama, the best of men, was advised personally by Vasistha, the preceptor, with sweet words, he replied to him who was sitting beside him:
The course of action the parents always adopt in respect of their son, the benefits they confer on him according to their resources, the way they lull him to sleep and clothe him, the affectionate words they always speak to him and the way they bring him up all these cannot be repaid.
King Dasaratha is my father who begot me. The promise I made him shall not prove false.
Having been addressed by Rama in this way, Bharata of great generosity, in extreme distress, addressing the charioteer who was standing nearby said:
O charioteer, quickly spread kusa grass on the bare ground. Until my esteemed brother shows his grace, I shall lie down here -- waiting.
Like a poor brahmin, starving, my face muffled, I shall lie down in front of the hut until he agrees to return.
Bharata was mentally disturbed saw Sumantra waiting for Rama's order. Then he himself brought a heap of kusa grass and spread it on the ground.
Rama, the foremost of royal sages and highly powerful said, 'Dear Bharata, what wrong have I done that you should prevent me by lying down in front of me?'
A brahmin alone is competent in this world to prevent a person by lying down on one side (in front of him). One who is anointed king is not permitted by (scriptural) tradition to squat in protest.
O Bharata, O tiger among men, O scion of the Raghu race give up this formidable vow. Arise and quickly return to Ayodhya, the best of cities.
While remaining seated, Bharata looking all around at the inhabitants from towns and villages, questioned them 'why don't you all persuade my esteemed brother to return'.
Those inhabitants from towns and villages replied to the magnanimous Bharata 'we  know the scion of the Kakutha dynasty, Rama, very well. What he has said is proper'.
Highly distinguished Rama is firmly fixed on the command of his father. That is why we are incapable of making him return quickly.
Having understood their words, Rama said to him, 'Listen to the words of our friends who have a righteous vision.'
O mightyarmed son of the Raghus, you have heard both (them and me). Carefully think over. Arise. Touch me and sip water.
Then Bharata stood up and performed achamana (sipping of water) and said 'let the assembly of  learned men, counsellors and guildsmen hear me'.
I never asked my father to confer the kingdom on me. I never urged my mother to seek the kingdom for me. I never supported the exile of my esteemed brother Rama, who is supreme in the knowleldge of righteousness.
If it is absolutely essential to live in the forest in accordance with the command of my father, I myself  shall also dwell in the forest for fourteen years.
On hearing the genuine sentiments of his brother, righteous Rama was astonished. He said to the inhabitants from towns and villages:
Neither Bharata nor I can in any way annul anything which was sold, pledged or bought by my father during his lifetime.
As far as living in the forest is concerned it is reprehensible to keep a subsitute for me and it shall not be done. Kaikeyi has acted rightfully and my father has taken the proper decision.
I know Bharata as a man of forbearance and one who honours elders. Everything will turn out well for this great soul wedded to truth.
On returning from the forest, I shall become the supreme lord of this earth along with this virtuous brother.
The king (Dasaratha) was solicited by Kaikeyi and I shall abide. Therefore, you also release the lord of the earth, our father from the charge of falsehood.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकादशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the hundredeleventh sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The great sages assembled there were amazed at witnessing the meeting of the two brothers (Rama and Bharata) of umparalleled briliance.
The hosts of sages, siddhas and devarshis watching invisible the two Kakutstha  brothers extoled them.
On hearing their dialogue we are deeply drawn towards them, these two sons of king Dasaratha who was fortunate to have these practioners of righteousness and whose strength is dharma.
Thereafter hosts of rishis desiring the speedy destruction of tenheaded Ravana said these words to Bharata, the best of kings.
O Bharata, born in an illustrious race, highly sagacious and a man of virtuous conduct and great renown, accept Rama's proposal if you have any regard for your father.
We always desire that Rama should discharge his debt to his father. Dasaratha, who  by redeeming himself of his obligation to Kaikeyi, had ascended heaven.
Then the great rishis, gandharvas and royal sages having said this, returned to their respective abodes.
Of pleasing appearance, Rama, gladdened by the auspicious statements (of the sages),  paid them homage with a cheerful countenance.
Before Bharata, with his limbs trembling and with palms folded (in reverence) was   ready to depart, he said to Rama:
O Rama, keeping in view the code of kings and tradition of our family, it behoves you to consider my supplication and that of my mother.
I do not venture to protect this kingdom all by myself and keep the inhabitants of the towns and villages who are loyal to you pleased.
All our relatives, warriors, friends and wellwishers long to see you like farmers yearn for the raincloud.
O sagacious Rama, accept this kingdom and ensure its stability. You are powerful enough to govern this world. So accept this kingdom and restore its stability.
Having said this, Bharata, fell at the feet of his brother, and speaking sweetly, he profusely  entreated  Rama.
Rama took his in his arms Bharata who had a darkblue complexion, whose eyes were like petals of lotus and whose voice was the voice of an amorous swan.
O child, this wisdom of yours is both inborn and imbibed through training. With this,  you are perfectly capable of protecting the earth.
After due consultation with ministers, friends, counsellors and prudent persons,   accomplish all tasks, however formidable they may appear.
The Moon might lose its splendour, snow might abandon the Himavat mountain, the ocean might overstep its shores, but I shall not forsake the promise made to my father.
Dear brother, whether out of affection or greed, your mother has done this for your sake. It should not agitate your mind. You should conduct yourself as one should towards one's mother.
On hearing this, Bharata replied to the son of  Kausalya who looked like the Sun or the new Moon in brilliance:
O noble one, place your feet on these sandals decorated with gold. They will secure the prosperity and safety of the entire world.
Rama, the best of men, one with great brilliance, put on and then put off the sandals  and presented them to the magnanimous Bharata.
Bharata bowed before the sandals and said to Rama, 'O tormentorr of enemies, O hero, wearing matted locks and bark garments, living on fruits and roots, placing the responsibility of ruling the kingdom on your sandals and looking forward to your arrival, I shall reside outside the city for fourteen years.'
O best of the Raghus, if I do not behold you on the day after completion of fourteen years I shall enter the blazing fire.
'Be it so', assured Rama and then affectionately embracing both Bharata and Satrughna, said to Bharata:
Look after your mother, O chief of the Raghus Do not be angry with her. Swear in my name and in the name of Sita. So saying, eyes filled with tears, Rama took leave of his brother.
The valiant and righteous Bharata, worshipped the welldecorated sandals and after circumambulating Rama reverentially placed them atop the best of elephants.
Inflexibly fixed in his own code of righteouness, like the Himavat mountain, Rama, the enhancer of the progeny of the Raghu dynasty, paid respect due to the preceptors, ministers and subjects in accordance with their rank, blessed his younger brothers, Bharata and Satrughna and sent them forth.
His mothers were unable to bid him farewell their throats were choked with tears of sorrow but Rama himself paid obeisance to them and entered his hut in tears.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्वादशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the hundredtwelfth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Then Bharata accompanied by Satrughna, placing the sandals on his head in delight, boarded the chariot.
Vasishta, Vamadeva, Jabali of rigorous penance and all the ministers honoured for their counsel proceeded ahead.
All of them circumambulated the mighty mountain Chitrakuta and proceeded east towards the charming river Mandakini.
Beholding a thousand varieties of beautiful minerals, Bharata with his army proceeded  alongside the mountain.
Not far from Chitrakuta mountain, Bharata beheld a hermitage where sage Bharadwaja resided.
On approaching the hermitage of sage Bharadwaja, Bharata  alighted from the chariot,   and prostrated at his feet.
Then Bhardwaja asked Bharata in delight, My son, have you accomplished your task?  Did you meet  Rama?
Having been thus addressed by wise Bharadwaja, Bharata, devoted to righteousness, replied:
Entreated by me and by preceptor (Vasistha), the highly pleased Rama with his  firmness of mind replied  to Vasistha:
In sooth, I shall honour the words of promise given by my father and live in the forest for fourteen years, as promised.
On hearing him, Vasistha a great intellectual and highly eloquent one replied to Rama, skilled in words of deep significance.
O extremely sagacious one, bestow with pleasure your sandals decked with gold for security and safety of Ayodhya.
Thus addressed by Vasistha, Rama stood facing eastward wearing these sandals. and bestowed them on me for the sake of ruling the kingdom.
I am now returning to Ayodhya with these auspicious sandals permitted by the  magnanimous Rama.
Hearing the auspicious words of  the magnanimous Bharata, sage Bharadwaja said to  him in words still more  auspicious.
O best of men, foremost among men of excellent character and dispositon, it is not surprising that all noble qualities come to reside in you naturally like water poured flowing downward.
With you as his son, endowed with qualities of righteousness and devotion to duty, your mightyarmed father Dasaratha is not dead. (He lives through you).
Hearing the words of the magnanimous Bharadwaja, Bharata paid his respect, folding his palms,  and clasping the feet of the sage and sought his permission to leave.
Then illustrious Bharata circumambulated the sage several times in homage  before he set out for Ayodhya with his counsellors.
The vast army of Bharata with all its carriages, carts, horses and elephants following   him again turned  back towards Ayodhya.
Thereafter, all of them crossed  the divine river Yamuna wreathed in waves and, beheld  the Ganga of sacred waters once again.
Bharata along with his kins and his army crossed the Ganga with its overflowing,  wonderful waters and entered the beautiful city of Sringiberapura and from there he proceeded until he beheld the city of Ayodhya.
On seeing the city of Ayodhya bereft of his father and brothers, Bharata, consumed with grief, said to the charioteer:
O charioteer, look, Ayodhya is in shapeless shambles. It is silent and cheerless. It is dull and desolate. It shines no more.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रयोदशोरशततमस्सर्गः।Thus ends the hundredthirteenth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Bharata, the renowned lord (of Ayodhya) travelled on the chariot that produced a deep, soothing, sound. And entered Ayodhya soon.
(The city looked) like Rohini, the beloved consort of the Moon, the star which was majesticlly radiating flaming brilliance and now, tormented by the exalted Rahu which has eclipsed the Moon, shines alone.
(It appeared) like a lean mountainstream with scant, hot and turbid waters, with scorched aquatic birds and with small and large fishes and crocodiles dead due to the heat of the Sun.
warriors slain in the great battle (the city appeared desolate).
the midst of the herd despairs and no longer grazes the new grass.
with the melodious humming of intoxicated bees and suddenly shrivelling, ravaged by the fastspreading forest fire.
Ayodhya with its markets and shops closed, and its merchants in a daze looked like the sky covered with clouds obscuring the Moon and stars.
a dale.
Illustrious Bharata, son of Dasaratha, seated in his chariot, addressed the charioteer as he drove the most excellent of chariots saying:
How is it that in Ayodhya, the deep and allpervasive songs and sounds of musical instruments of the former days are not heard now?
The breeze no longer carries the intoxicating odour of spirituous liquor, the pervading fragrance of flower garlands and agaru (incense).
After Rama's the exile the clatter of excellent carriages, the pleasing neighing of horses and trumpeting of elephants in rut and the rattle of chariots are no longer heard now.
Since Rama has departed, the young men in distress do not enjoy expensive incense of agaru and sandalwood paste and garlands of fresh flowers.
This city is stricken with grief on account of Rama's departure. Men do not go out on pleasure jaunts wearing garlands of variegated flowers. Festivities are not celebrated.
Certainly splendour has left along with my brother. Like the night when the rain pours down during the waning of the Moon, Ayodhya shines not.
When will my brother return to Ayodhya like a carnival and cause delight to every one  like summer clouds?
The highways of Ayodhya thronged with groups of elegantly attired young men or adults with their majestic gait, do not shine.
Thus mourning in several ways, Bharata entered his fathers' palace (now) bereft of the king like a cave without the lion.
After keeping his mothers in Ayodhya, the griefstricken Bharata who was firm in his vows, said to the elders:
I take leave of all of you. I am going to Nandigrama where I shall keep company with grief on account of Rama's absence.
King Dasaratha has gone to heaven. My elder brother and guru is in the forest. I shall await his return for ruling the kingdom since he alone is the illustrious king of Ayodhya.
Hearing the auspicious words of the magnanimous Bharata the counsellors, priests including Vasistha replied:
O Bharata, the words you have uttered out of devotion to your brother which befit you alone are highly praiseworthy.
You are always attached to your relations, firmly established in the welfare of your brothers and are pursuing a noble path. Who would not approve of this?
On hearing the pleasing words of the counsellors which were in conformity with his desire, Bharata said to his charioteer, 'Harness my chariot'.
With a cheerful countenance illustrious Bharata paid obeisance to all his mothers and, acompanied by Satrughna, ascended the chariot.
Highly pleased, Bharata and Satrughna ascended the chariot and, surrounded by counsellors and priests, set out  speedily.
Preceded by preceptors, like Vasistha and other brahmins, all of them proceeded eastward in the direction of Nandigrama.
When Bharata left, the army with hordes of elephants, horses and chariots and  inhabitants of Ayodhya  followed him unbidden.
Righteous Bharata who was deeply attached to his brother proceeded speedily towards Nandigrama on the chariot bearing the sandals of Rama on his head.
Bharata entered Nandigrama quickly, alighted from the chariot and then, addressing, the preceptors, said:
My brother gave me this kingdom as a trust. He gave me the sandals decorated with gold for securing the prosperity and security (of the kingdom).
Then Bharata placed the sandals held in trust on his head and, overcome with grief, he addressed the concourse of subjects:
Hold the royal paresol now. This is the accepted symbol of the exalted feet of my brother. These sandals shall establish righteousness in the kingdom.
This kingdom has been given me by my brother out of affection as a trust. I shall safeguard it until Rama's return.
'I myself shall see soon Rama's feet reunited with these sandals.
The burden of this kingdom has been cast on me. On reunion with Rama, I shall hand it over to my brother, my guru and shall be engaged in his service.
Restoring the sacred sandals, the kingdom and this city of Ayodhya held as a trust by me, I shall be cleansed of the sin.
After Rama is coronated and the people are delighted and pleased, the renown and pleasure for me will be fourfold (what is obtained from ruling the kingdom).
Thus lamenting in desolation and grief, the illustrious Bharata lived in Nandigrama along with his counsellors and started ruling the kingdom.
Bharata, the warrior and lord, wore bark garments and matted locks and lived the life of an ascetic in Nandigrama along with his army.
Bharata who was attached to his brother and ever obedient to him, fulfilled his vow. He coronated the sandals and lived at Nandigrama longing for the return of Rama.
Bharata reported everything relating to the kingdom to the sandals first. Waving the chamaras (a fan made of yak tail) himself, he held the royal parasol over them.
After the coronation of the sandals of his esteemed brother Rama, illustrious Bharata ruled the kingdom, subordianating himself to them.
Whenever an issue, however small, arose, Bharata kept the sandals informed. Whenever a valuable gift was presented, he offered it to the sandals before he accepted it. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चदशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the hundredfifteenth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
After Bharta, had departed, Rama who was living in the penancegrove of ascetics observed that the ascetics were filled with apprehensions, and were eager (to leave that forest).
Rama observed that the sages who earlier sought to stay with him near his hermitage under his protection on chitrakuta were filled with anxiety (now).
Those sages, glancing at Rama with suspicious eyes, knitting their eyebrows and murmering among themselves, conversed secretly.
Having observed their anxiety, Rama apprehending somethig in his mind approached  the chief of the hermitage with folded palms and said:
O revered sire, have you seen any change in my conduct? For what reason are the sages looking perturbed?
Have the sages found my younger brother Lakshmana doing something unbecoming of him through inadvertence?
Has Sita devoted in her service to me and engaged in serving you failed to follow the conduct befitting a woman?
Hearing those words, an ascetic old in age and austerities, as though trembling said  to Rama who is compassionate to all beings:
O dear child, how can goodnatured Sita who is always engaged in performing auspicious deeds, especially towards ascetics be associated with violation of duty?
There is apprehension for ascetics from the demons on acount of your presence here. That is why they are conversing with one another about the likely fallout.
O dear child, Khara, one of the brothers of Ravana is dwelling in nearby 'Janasthana'. He is impudent, reportedly winner of battles, cruel, sinful, a maneater and haughty.  He has uprooted all the ascetics  from Janasthana. He will not tolerate even you.
O dear child, ever since you started residing in this hermitage rakshasas have been  tormenting the ascetics.
They appear in various distorted forms now rapacious, now fearful, now deformed.
Those wicked rakshasas employ forbidden and dirty means against ascetics and kill them by suddenly appearing in front of them.
These debased rakshasas, concealing themselves in various ashram sites take delight  in harassing and killing the ascetics.
When sacrifices are about to start, they throw away the sacrificial ladels and vessels containing sacrificial materials and sprinkle water on sacrificial fire. They also break down the earthen vessels used in the sacrifice.
Now all these sages are urging me to abandon this hermitage infested by these wicked rakshasas and move to another region.
O Rama, those vile creatures resort to physical violence against ascetics, we have therefore, resolved to quit this ashram.
Not very far from here stands an ancient ashram in a lovely forest abounding in roots and fruits and I with my companions will seek shelter there.
Dear child, Khara will also misbehave with you as usual. (Therefore), if you so decide you may come along with us.
O Rama, even though you are always vigilant and capable in all possible ways to defend youself, a doubt arises in our mind. It is perilous for you to live here with your wife.
It was not possible for prince Rama to hold back by mere words that ascetic who was saying like this and was anxious to quit the hermitage.
The leader of the group quit the hermitage along with his companions after paying  respect to Rama, convincing him and taking leave of him.
Rama, followed the sages for some distance to bid them farewell. He paid obeisance to the chief of the group and having grasped the instruction of the highly pleased  sages, he with their consent returned to his holy hermitage.
Lord Rama, did not leave that hermitage deserted by the sages even for a moment. Those who had adopted the traditions of the sages and  had acquired many virtues followed Rama.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षोडशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the hundredsixteenth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
When the ascetics had departed, Rama thought over the matter well and did not like to reside there for many reasons.
It is here that Bharata, mothers along with citizens of Ayodhya have visited me. That  memory soaked with grief is chasing me.
Due to the encampment of the army of the magnanimous Bharata (here), this place has been filled with the dung of horses and elephants and made exceedingly dirty.
We shall, therefore, go to some other place, having resolved thus, Rama accompanied by Sita and Lakshmana set forth.
Having reached the hermitage of the revered sage Atri, illustrious Rama prostrated before him and Atri also received him as his son.
That sage Atri himself extended to Rama the hospitality befitting him in all possible ways and treated Lakshmana and highly virtuous Sita with kind words.
Conversant in the ways of righteousness and eagaged in the welfate of all beings, sage Atri called out his aged wife who is revered by all and spoke kind words to her.
Atri, who was excellent among the sages said to his ascetic wife who was highly virtuous and an adherent of righteousness, Welcome Sita. Thereafter, he related to Rama a story about his asetic wife who follows the ways of righteousness.
O blameless one (Rama), once this world was consecutively ravaged by drought for ten years. It was the virtuous Anasuya who created roots and fruits and caused Ganga to flow. She was engaged in severe mortifications and selfimposed religious observances. She practised severe asceticism for ten thousand years bathed in her vows. Solicited on behalf of the gods, she removed all impediments and converted ten nights into one. She is like a your mother to you.
'She is renowned throughout this world for her deeds as Anasuya, (one who is free from anger). Aged, illustrious she is free frm anger, worthy of adoration by all beings. Let Sita approach her'.
Hearing those words of the sage, Rama said be it so and said to righteous Sita these choice words.
O princess, you have heard the message of the sage. Without delay approach the ascetic (Anasuya) for your welfare.
Having heard the words of Rama, intended for her welfare, Sita, daughter of the king of Mithila, approached the consort of Atri (Devi Anasuya), knower of righteousness, and reverently circumambulated her.
Highly chaste and fortunate Anasuya was very old and feeble. Her skin was wrinkled and her hair turned grey due to old age. Her body was constantly trembling like a plantain tree in a stormy wind. Pronouncing her name to such Anasuya, Sita made obeisance to her with utmost concentration.
Sita offered her obeisance to the blameless ascetic, Anasuya, folding her palms and enquired of her wellbeing in delight.
Anasuya was delighted  to see the glorious Sita who was always engaged in righteous acts and  said in kind words, You are fortunate. You are observing your rightful duty.
O noble Sita, by the grace of heaven you are following Rama, forsaking your kinsmen and wealth and confining yourself to the forest.
One who is devoted to her husband, whether he be in the city or in the forest, whether  he is sinful or virtuous, will attain the most prosperous worlds.
For a woman of noble nature her husband, whether he be licentious or of bad character or devoid of riches, is her supreme lord.
O Sita, on reflection I know of none who is a better friend than the husband. He, like an imperishable penance, once acquired is never lost.
Those wicked women whose minds are overpowered by carnal desires, ranging at will as lords of their husbands, do not understand about vice and virtue.
O Sita, those women  under the control of unworthy acts are dislodged from the path of righteousness and get infamy.
Women like you who are endowed with virtues and can distinguish between good and bad in this world, like those who  perform  virtuous deeds, will move about in heaven.
When Anasuya thus addressed Vaidehi who is free from any malice, she worshipped  Anasuya  and started speaking in a gentle tone.
It is no wonder that a noble lady like you should  instruct me this way. It is known to me that a husband is a guru to his wife.
O noble lady, even if my husband is devoid of good conduct, he should be obeyed without showing any hesitation.
What to speak of a husband if he is worthy of applause for his virtues, is compassionate, a subduer of the senses, righteous and ever affectionate like a mother and a father?
Mighty Rama shows the same behaviour and treatment towards the other consorts of the king as he does towards his own mother Kausalya.
Heroic Rama is affectionate towards king Dasaratha and is conversant with righteousness. Renouncing the sense of selfrespect he honours all the women on whom his father had cast his glance even once just as his own mother.
When departing for this frightful and desolate forest, the great (advice) imparted by my motherinlaw is firmly fixed in my mind.
When I have been taught by my mother earlier, at the time of bestowal of my hand to Rama in the presence of the sacrificial fire (as witness) is etched in my mind.
O righteous one (Anasuya), after listening to your words the instructions given by my motherinlaw and my mother are renewed (remembered again). For a woman, no other penance is laid down (in scriptures) except service to her husband.
Having served her husband (faithfully), Savitri is honoured in heaven. You also, by following the same path of serving your husband, shall reach the heaven.
Rohini, the very best among all women and the goddess of heaven, is never seen in the sky separated from the moon even for a moment.
Execellent women such as these, firm in their vows to their husband are highly revered in the world of gods through their own meritorious deeds.
Thereafter hearing Sita's words, Anasuya affectionately kissed her forehead and said this in order to make her happy:
O Sita of pure conduct, I have great ascetic power obtained through practising various austerities. With its strength I shall give what you want for your enjoyment.
O Sita, I am glad to hear your befitting and pleasing words. Tell me what appropriate  thing you desire and I shall give you.
On hearing her words Sita was surprised. With a gentle smile she said, to Anasuya who was endowed with ascetic power, 'I think you have already granted me the boons'.
When Sita said so, Anasuya who knew her righteous duty was immensely pleased. and replied, 'What a joy I shall make the words you have spoken come true'.
O princess of Videha, O  Sita, I bestow on you this best garland of the gods, raiment, jewellery, fragrant unguents, and precious ointment for anointing your body with. All this will beautify your limbs. It is convenient (to use) and will never fade.
O daughter of Janaka, you will enhance the glory of your husband by anointing your body with this divine, fragrant unguent to your body like Lakshmi enhancing the glory of eternal Visnu.
That princess from Mithila accepted the incomparable gifts of love, the raiment, fragrant unguents, jewellery and also the garland.
Illustrious Sita accepted the gifts of love and with palms folded in reverence sat beside her, an ascetic.
Anasuya who was firm in her vows commenced to ask Sita this way about a certain tale (that was close to her heart).
O Sita, I have heard that you have been won by the illustrious Rama in the swayamvara. At least that is the story which reached my ears.
O daughter of Mithila, I would like to hear the story in detail. You should tell me the whole story as you experienced it.
'Listen' said Sita, thus addressed, and began relating the story to Anasuya, a performer of austerities.
There is a king in Mithila, Janaka by name. He is heroic and is conversant with  righteousness. Engaged in the duties of a kshatriya, he is rules the earth with justice.
When he was ploughing the circular plot of land for performing a sacrifice, it is said I emerged from the earth by breaking it and therefore I became his dauhghter.
Engaged in sowing fistfuls of seeds, king Janaka found me covered with dust and was astonished.
As he had no children, he, on his own accord, lifted me up and placing me on his lap, saying, This is my daughter, he began showering (lots of) love on me.
'O king, she is an incomparable divine being. By right she is your daughter'. These were the words (Janaka) heard from out of the sky.
Thereafter, my father and the righteous lord of Mithila was delighted in possessing  me when a noble thought struck his mind.
Bestowed as the choicest one of meritorious acts on the chief queen, I was brought up by her, by nature affectionate, with the love of a mother.
When my father saw I had attained  the marriageable age, he was immersed in sorrow like an indigent man who had lost all his wealth.
Even though he was an Indra on earth, as a father of  an unmarried girl he would be humiliated by men who are his equal or inferior in this world.
Having perceived that the humiliation is not very far, king Janaka was plunged in a sea of sorrow like one who cannot reach the shore without a float.
The ruler of the earth knew that I was not born from a woman's womb, and could not find a suitable husband for me after deep reflection.
After constantly pondering over the matter, the wise king arrived at the decision to perform a swayamvara for his daughter.
Magnanimous Varuna out of his affection had given him, on the occasion of a great sacrifice, an excellent bow with inexhaustible arrows and a pair of quivers.
Because of its weight, no human could move that bow despite great effort nor were the kings capable of bending it even in their dreams.
My truthful father, after having acquired the bow, invited all the princes and placed the great bow before them in the assembly where he declared:
Beholding the mighty bow resembling a mountain in weight, the kings, unable to lift it, paid their homage and left.
After a long time, resplendent Rama whose prowess was truth, arrived along with  his brother Lakshman and sage Viswamitra in order to witness the sacrifice.
Having accepted the honour extended by my father, righteous Viswamitra spoke to him about those two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana.
'Both these sons of king Dasaratha wish to see the bow. Show the divine bow to prince  Rama'.
At the words of that ascetic, my father brought out the bow. Mighty and valiant Rama bent it and strung it and drew it in the twinkling of an eye.
When Rama was stringing the bow with force, it was broken into two in the middle and fell down with a dreadful sound like that of thunder.
Then, my father steadfast in truth, held a vessel of pure water and declared his decision to offer me to Rama.
Then Rama did not accept the offer of my father straightaway before he knew the opinion of his father Dasaratha,  king of Ayodhya.
Thereafter, my fatherinlaw, the aged king Dasaratha was invited and my father  offered me to Rama  known for his sagacity.
My father, on his own accord, bestowed Urmila, my younger sister of chaste and of  pleasing appearance as wife to Lakshmana.
In this way my father bestowed me on Rama in that swayamvara and I remain devoted to my husband who is the foremost among the valiant in treading the path of  righteousness.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टादशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।Thus ends the one hundredeighteenth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Then righteous Anasuya, having heard the great story of Sita, kissed her on the forehead and embraced her with both the arms.
You have related wonderfully and sweetly your Swayamvara with each word and each syllable uttered clearly. I have heard everything as it happened. O sweetspeaking Sita, I have greatly enjoyed your story.
The resplendent Sun has set. The auspcious night is drawing near. The birds who forage far and wide for food during the day return to their nests to rest for the night. You can hear them twittering.
The sages also  are returning in groups with waterpitchers filled with water and their bark robes soaked with water after their ceremonial bath.
The ascetics have duly offered oblations to the fire in Agnihotra sacrifices and the smoke, tawny like the pigeon's body, emanates wafted by the wind.
The trees with sparse leaves all over have grown dense, the quarters in the distant region are no longer discernible by the senses.
The night rangers have started moving everywhere and the deer in the penance  grove are beginning to sleep around the sacred altars.
O Sita, adorned with stars, the night has commenced. You can see the moon rising in the sky spreading his mantle of light.
With my permission you may go now and be a companion of Rama. I am thoroughly contented  with your story told so sweetly.
O Sita, adorn yourself in my presence. Dear child, permit me the pleasure of  adorning  you with these divine ornaments.
Sita, adorned, looked like the daughter of a god. She bowed at the feet of Anasuya in reverence and set out to meet Rama.
Rama, the most eloquent among men, saw Sita adorned, and rejoiced at the gifts of love given by the ascetic Anasuya.
Sita the princess of Mithila related everything to Rama and showed him the gifts of love given by ascetic Anasuya -- raiment, jewellery and garlands.
Rama the great charioteer and Lakshmana were exceedingly gratified to see the honour conferred on Sita, rare among mortals.
Thereafter, the descendant of Raghu, whose countenance resembled the Moon, having received the hospitality of the accomplished ascetics, passed that holy night in delight.
Night over, the two best men, Rama and Lakshmana, after their ablution took leave of the ascetics inhabiting the forest who offered morning oblations to the fire .
The righteous ascetics dwelling in the forest informed both Rama and Lakshmana  that  part of the forest infested by demons.
O Rama, this great forest is haunted by carnivorous demons who can assume any form and by blooddrinking wild animals.
O Rama, in this great forest demons will devour the  ascetics if they find them impure or intoxicated or indolent. Prevent them.
O Rama, this is the one path in the forest used by the ascetics to gather fruits. You can safely cross the otherwise impassable forest through this path.
The ascetics offered their blessings to Rama the tormentor of enemies. Thereafter, accompanied by his wife and Lakshmana, he entered the great forest like the Sun entering the mass of clouds. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे श्रीमद्वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये चतुर्विंशत्सहस्रिकायां संहितयां श्रीमदयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनविंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।   Thus ends the hundrednineteenth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
