Arriving with Laksmana at the lake filled with lotuses, lilies and fishes, Rama, his senses oppressed, burst into tears.
He was glad to see it but sad at the thought of Sita. His passion stirred, his senses shaken, he said this to Saumitri:
'O Saumitri Pampa looks beautiful with its water clear as vaidurya, its lilies and lotuses in full bloom and its trees in all their variety.
'O Saumitri look at the pleasant forest around Pampa where trees stand splendid like mountainpeaks.
Already saddened due to the abduction of Sita and plight of Bharata, I am tormented by Spring.
Though stricken with grief, I feel so delighted to see the auspicious Pampa with its wonderful forest and cool water scattered with flowers.
Abounding in lotuses, birds and beasts and vicious serpents moving about, it looks splendid indeed.
The bluishyellow grass, dotted with different kinds of flowers fallen from the trees shines like a carpet spread.
Entwined with flowering creepers the treetops are covered all over with rich loads of flowers.
'O Saumitri it is the season of spring. The trees are laden with fruits and fragrant flowers. Ecstatic blows the gentle freeze.
'Look at the flowering trees sending showers of flowers like water dropping from the clouds, O Saumitri
Various forest trees shaken by the force of the wind scatter flowers on the beautiful rocky surface of earth.
O Saumitri look, the breeze appears to be playing with the flowers that are fallen and that are still on the trees.
'Shaken by the strong wind all over, the tops of trees look as if they are knitted together.
'The gentle touch of the breeze that blows, cool like sandalwood, full of pure fragrance, takes away the fatigue of the body.
As if the trees are singing, swayed by the wind, while the bees in the forest, fragrant with honey, hum in tune.
'The huge trees in the scenic mountainranges look delightful with their blossoms touching the peaks.
With the tops of trees covered with flowers, the black bees hovering (humming) over them, the trees, shaken by the restless wind look like singers. (The trees with the top decked with flowers, the bees like black hair on the head swaying in the wind look like dancing and singing)
'See these Karnikaras in full bloom all over, looking like people clad in yellow silk adorned with golden ornaments.
'O Saumitri this spring season resonating with the sounds of several kinds of birds, kindles my anguish as I am separated from Sita.
'Kandarpa (Cupid) torments me while I am already griefstricken. The Cuckoo with his challenging cheerfulness mocks me.
'Lakshmana, while I am already lovestricken, the swamphen (gallinule, a marshbird) troubles me with its joyous cackles in the beautiful foreststream.
'While in the hermitage in the past, my beloved was very glad to hear such sounds, invite me to join her and rejoice again.
'See, the different kinds of birds flying towards trees, shrubs and vines making wonderful sounds all over.
'O Lakshmana the female birds praised by their flocks, are united with their male partners. Enjoying the sweet sounds of large black bees, they are singing melodiously.
These trees seem to enkindle my passion through all sorts of sounds like the loud cackle of swamphens and the sweet warble of the male cuckoos.
'The fire of spring with clusters of Asoka flowers as its charcoal, its coppercoloured tender leaves as flames, the buzz of bees as its crackle will, as if, consume me.
'O Saumitri my life is meaningless if I cannot see my beloved Sita with her delicate eyelashes, beautiful locks of hair and her sweet voice.
'O sinless one, the spring season is dear to my beloved Sita when the outskirts of the forest are filled with voices of the cockoo.
'The fire of grief ignited by Kandarpa (the god of love), enhanced by the effects of spring will certainly consume me soon.
'Unable to see my beloved wife, the very sight of these lovely trees intensifies my love for her who shines resplendent in me.
'When in place of Vaidehi I see spring (with its cool breeze) that used to take away the sweat generated by sensual enjoyment, my sorrow is intensified.
'O Saumitri the cruel breeze of the spring forest torments me as I am now immersed in grief in the absence of my fawneyed beloved.
'Delightful are the peacocks dancing here and there, their feathers looking like crystal windows flung open by the wind.
'The peacocks intoxicated with passion for the peahens surround them intensifying my longing (for Vaidehi).
'Look at the lovelorn peahen, excited by love, dancing on the moutain slope, O Lakshmana  Engrossed in love, she dances for wooing the peacock.
'Overwhelmed with love, the enchanted peacock, spreading his wings is running after her, making sounds, as though mocking her.
'The peacock's beloved, for sure, has not been abducted by the demon. Therefore, he is dancing in delight in the forest in the company of his beloved.
'It is extremely unbearable for me to stay in the forest during this season of flowers (Spring). Look at the passion even among beasts and birds, O Lakshmana And craving for love, the peahen sports near her mate.
'Had the largeeyed Janaki not been stolen, she would have also paid advances to me in this manner with all her love and excitement.
'The trees look enchanting with flowers in full bloom, with bees hovering over them. But the flowers fruitlessly drop down on the ground.
'If spring reigns wherever my beloved Sita is, she must have been overwhelmed with similar sad feelings like me.
'Spring must not have touched the place where she is now staying. Otherwise how could my Sita with eyes like blue lotus live without me?
'Or, if there is spring where my beloved lives, what can that lady of beautiful hips do, threatened by enemies.
'Eager to speak with her gentle voice, my young beloved, blessed with eyes like lotus petals, will certainly give up her life, unable to enjoy the spring.
'My mind makes me feel certain that Sita with her chastity might not be able to live separated from me.
'Sita has her love truly fixed in me. My love for her is equally steadfast.
'This cool breeze that carries the fragrance of flowers, that is gentle in its touch feels like fire when I think about my beautiful beloved.
'The pleasant touch of the wind, which made me happy in the company of Sita intensifies my grief now in her absence.
'The crow that cried unhappily flying in the sky as if to foretell my separation from Sita, is now on the tree, singing joyfully (suggesting my possible union with Sita).
'The same crow attendant on Vaidehi there will take me to my largeeyed beloved.
'Losten, O Lakshmana to the sweet warblings of the birds on the blossoming treetops of the forest. My love for her (Sita) enhances with their sweet voices.
'This honeybee is eager to approach the bunch of tilaka flowers in bloom scattered by the wind like a lover advancing towards his passionate beloved.
'This asoka tree increases (by nature) the sorrow of lovers. Perhaps it make its presence felt in order to intimidate me with the clusters of its flowers scattered by the wind.
'O Lakshmana these mangotrees full of blossoms appear like sexited men who have applied fragrant unguents to their bodies.
'O Saumitri O' tiger among men look at the kinnaras wandering here and there, in the wonderful forest around the Pampa lake.
'O Lakshmana look at these lotuses with fine fragrance all over the water glowing like the rising Sun.
'This Pampa with its water clear and fragrant with red and blue lotuses is filled with swans and geese.
'Lake Pampa shines with lotuses with bees on their filaments like the rising sun.
'Frequented by the Chakravakas and surrounded by the wonderful forest with thirsty elephants and deer this Pampa looks beautiful.
'O Lakshmana look at the lotuses in clear water dashing against one another due to waves caused by the force of the wind.
'Unable to see my beloved with eyes large like totus petals and an ardent lover of lotuses, I have no desire to live.
'Oh how adversly disposed is the god of love He makes me remember that auspicious lady with a pleasing voice when she is lost and difficult to reach.
'If the spring that has set in, with the trees in bloom does not kill me, I have once again to endure the agony of love.
'Whatever was endearing to me earlier in the company of Sita, has turned out to be disenchanting without her.
'Seeing the delicate petals around the lotus buds that look like beautiful eyelids of Sita, my eyes crave for them O Lakshmana
'The bleeze that blows through the trees carrying the fragrance of the filaments of lotuses feels pleasant like Sita's breath.
'Look at the very spectacular karnikara tree with its blossmed branches on the mountain slope towards the southern side of Pampa, O Saumitri
'This king of mountains is rich with plenty of minerals and, therefore, generates multicoloured dust particles splattered by the speed of the wind.
'O Saumitri With leafless kimsuka trees in full bloom all over the mountain ranges they appear beautiful like blazing mountains.
'Very closely grown on the banks of Pampa, stand malati, mallika and karavira trees with their clusters of fragrant blossoms.
'Fully blossmed ketaka, sinduvara, madhavi and kunda bushes in spring scatter their fragrance everywhere.
'Lotuses and blue asokas are also in bloom. Lodhra trees on the mountainslopes look golden like the lion's mane.
'There are trees like ankola, kuranta, churnaka, paribhadraka, mango, patali, kovidara, muchukunda, arjuna, ketaka, uddalaka, shirisha, shimshupa and shava, all in full bloom on the mountain peaks.
'While the branches of trees swayed by the wind draw close, the creepers follow the trees like lovely women in a drunken state.
'The wind blows from tree to tree, mountain to mountain, and forest to forest as though content to enjoy all the fragrance.
'Some trees stood fragrant with profuse flowers and some with buds shining blue.
'Fascinated by the flowers, the honeybees cling to one or the other, humming, 'this is soft, this is sweet, and this is fullyblossomed.'
'The bees greedy for honey move among the trees on the banks of Pampa. Resting for a while, at one place they fly soon to another.
'With countless flowers fallen on their own from trees and scattered like a bed of flowers on stone the ground is rendered comfortable enough to relax on.
'O Saumitri varieties of colourful flowers, some red and some yellow, are spread out on the mountain slopes.
'Winter has ended and the season of flowers has set in, O Saumitri The trees are full of flowers as if competing with one another.
'The trees, crowned with flowers filled with humming bees, look splendid. It appears they are calling one another, O Lakshmana
'This duck, entering into auspicious water, sports with its beloved and incites my love.
'O Saumitri look at this lake of cool water filled with, lotuses, chakravakas flying about and ducks floating.
Pampa, filled with swimming, kraunchas and frequented by big animals looks splendid. The joyous warbling of a variety of birds is highly exciting. They kindle my passion for my young, Moonfaced, lotus eyed beloved.
'If I find my dear beloved here on these mountain slopes full of passionate birds how happy will I not feel
'O Saumitri I can be alive and happy if Sita of slender waist enjoys here with me the sweet breeze of Pampa.
'O Lakshmana blessed are those who enjoy the breeze filled with fragrance of lotuses of the surrounding forests of Pampa. The gentle and auspicious breeze indeed takes away the sorrow of the mind.
'How can Janaka's daughter with eyes like lotus petals, so young and loving, sustain her life? Away from me, she must be feeling quite dejected.
'If righteous and truthful Janaka enquires about Sita's wellbeing in the assembly of people, what am I to speak ?
'She followed me, O Lakshmana  as I was deposed from the kingdom and distraught. Now helpless, how can I live without her?
'Unable to see her beautiful, face with auspicious eyes like fragrant lotuses, I feel (so) depressed.
'When can I listen to Sita's sweet, wholesome and virtuous, incomparable words interlaced with her gentle smile, O Lakshmana?
My young and faithful beloved used to put up a brave face and speak to me in all propriety to cheer me up in the midst of suffering in the forest whenever I felt tormented by passion.
'You may go to Ayodhya, O Lakshmana, to see our loving brother, Bharata. It is not possible for me to survive without the daughter of Janaka'.
Thus spoke Lakshmana these befitting, unforgettable words to his hissouled brother, Rama wailing like an orphan:
'O Rama, the foremost of men, control yourself. Be blessed. People who are pure at heart do not feel depressed at heart.
'Even if Ravana enters into the womb of Diti (mother of demons) along with Sita, I will slay him there if he does not return the daughter of Mithila.
'O noble prince be blessed. maintain composure. Without making any effort it is not possible to achieve the objective and recoup loss.
'O revered Sire, enterprise is supreme strength. Nothing is difficult in this world for one who is up and doing.
'Enterprising men will never be disappointed in their mission. It is possible to get Sita through effort alone.
'Bardon grief. Give up emotion. You are a great soul. You are not aware of your great accomplishments. (The temporary sorrow has relegated Rama's nobility to the background. Lakshmana is trying to restore the same)'.
Thus persuaded by Lakshmana, Rama who was hitherto besieged by grief and delusion, could set them aside and regain patience.
No more disturbed by delusion, Rama of unimaginable valour, crossed the very brilliant Pampa with beautiful plants floating on its surface.
The great Rama was overcome with grief while scanning the entire forest with its streams and caves. Engrossed in her thoughts, dejected at heart and inflicted with pain, he set both, accompanied by Lakshmana.
The great soul, Lakshmana, striding like a mighty elephant, with a steady mind, followed Rama dutifully, protecting him with his strength.
The swiftfooted, mighty king of monkeys saw those two men of wonderful appearance as they were wandering at Rishyamuka. He neither got scared nor showed signs of nervousness.
The great soul, Sugriva, walking slowly like an elephant saw both of them and became despondent, worried and immersed in fear.
Having seen the mighty Rama and Lakshmana, all other monkeys got frightened and ran into a sacred and safe hermitage.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे प्रथमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the first sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
On seeing the two great souls, heroic Rama and Lakshmana wielding the best of weapons, Sugriva was alarmed.
Agitated at heart, the best of vanaras started in all directions and could not settle down at one spot.
Beholding the two strong heroes, the monkey (Sugriva) was very much frightened. His heart sank.
Righteous Sugriva, became highly agitated, deliberated with all his followers on the pros and cons of the situation.
Sugriva, lord of monkeys, extremely agitated at the sight of both Rama and Lakshmana, spoke to his minister:
On seeing these supreme bowmen, Sugriva's counsellers left for the peak of another mountain.
The leaders of the monkey troops  reached Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, in no time  and stood surrounding him.
Jumping  from one mountain to another swiftly and shaking the mountain tops, the monkeys reached one spot.
Then the mighty monkeys jumping on the trees in full bloom shook them.
The great monkeys went on leaping all over the great (Rishyamuka) mountain,   scaring the deer, wildcats and tigers.
Thereafter, all the ministers of Sugriva assembled together on the king of mountains and stood (in front of Sugriva), with folded hands.
Suspecting that Vali might have sent them (Rama and Lakshmana), Hanuman, skilful in communication, said to Sugriva who was trembling in fear:
'This is a great mountain range of Malaya and there is no fear for Vali here. Give up this fear.
'O chief of monkeys I do not see here any sign of the cruel Vali, of whom you are afraid.
'O goodnatured Sugriva you are afraid of your elder brother Vali as he is evilminded and sinful. (But) I do not see any reason for you to be frightened as he is not found anywhere here.
'Oh monkey, whoever is lilylivered cannot be steady. It is evident that your very nature as a monkey makes you restless.
Having heard the wise words of Hanuman, Sugriva addressed him with words more auspicious.
'Who would not be apprehensive of these two longarmed and largeeyed individuals     comparable to sons of gods wielding arrows, bows and swords.
'I support these two excellent men might have been sent by Vali. Kings have many friends and so it may not be appropriate to trust any king.
'One has to identify these men roaming in disguise. These are not trustworthy and could even be our enemies, making us believe them so as to attack us when we are not vigilant.
'Vali is wise in his actions. Kings employ many strategies to annihilate their enemies. Our gullible individuals should be able to detect them.
'O Hanuman assume an ordinary form and approach them. Try to read them through their gestures, traits, forms and conversations.
'O best of monkeys ascertain their purpose by praising them and studying their honest intentions. Gain the confidence of the wielders of bows and if you find them agreeable, enquire the purpose of their entering this forest.
Instructed thus by the king of the monkeys, Hanuman, son of the Windgod, decided to meet both Rama and Lakshmana.
Hanuman, the venerable, powerful and not easily conquerable monkey, honoured the words of the great Lord of the monkeys, offered salutations and said 'So be it'. And then proceeded towards the mighty Rama and Lakshmana.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्वितीयस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the second sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by the sage Valmiki.
Listening to great Sugriva, Hanuman leaped from mount Rishyamuka on to the location of the Raghavas.
Hanuman, son of the Windgod, with an ingenious mind assumed the guise of a mendicant.
Approaching the Raghavas in all humility, valiant Hanuman offered them reverential salutations and addressed them in gentle and pleasing words.
The valiant son of the Windgod, Hanuman offered those heroes whose power came from their sense of truth due respect and spoke to them in all gentleness:
'You both fair in complexion, resemble royal sages or gods. You appear like ascetics and pursue vows in austerity. How come, you are present here, as if to frighten the animals and other creatures roaming this forest?
'Gazing at the trees on the bank of Pampa, you both appear in brilliant complexion as if to enhance the beauty of the auspicious river water. Though young, courageous and with handsome shoulders, you seem to sigh in exhaustion. And though you look like ascetics robed in bark,  you seem to terrify these creatures.
'Having the gaze  of a lion, both of you are heroic in your stance. As each of you hold a bow resembling the rainbow, you seem to be mighty warriors eager to annihilate the enemies. With the valour of superior bulls and your shoulders resembling elephant's trunks, you look magnificent, handsome and brilliant. (No doubt,) you are the best among the humans.
'You are young and radiant like the gods. This king of mountains (Rishyamuka) dazzles with your brilliance. Although you deserve to be sovereigns, how is it that you are here (into the forest)?
'Both of you appear alike, with eyes like lotus petals and locks of matted hair. You look like heroes descending from the world of the gods. You look like the Sun and the Moon dropped incidentally on this earth. With shoulders like those of a lion and the majesty of energetic bulls, you broadchested warriors appear like divine beings, though in fact humans.
'Your long arms and spherelike shoulders appear as strong as iron clubs. Although they deserve to be decked with ornaments, how is it they are unadorned?
'To me, you both deserve to rule the entire earth encompassed by seas and forests and adorned with mountains like Vindhya and Meru.
'Smeared with wonderful unguents, (your) bows look  very attractive. And they glow very much like Indra's golden thunderbolt.
'(Your) quivers also appear beautiful, for they are  fully  filled with sharp and deadly arrows which look like the hissing of dreadful snakes
'(Your) long and broad swords appear very huge in size. Being encrusted with pure gold, they  glitter brilliant like snakes in hyberation.
'Why are you silent  while I am talking? (I am here to apprise ) about a great and righteous warrior Sugriva, the chief of the troop of monkeys, sadly wandering all over the land here, banished by his brother
'I am a monkey called Hanuman. I am here sent by  great king Sugriva, the best of monkeys.
'The righteous Sugriva wishes to make friendship with both of you. For his wellbeing I came here disguised as a mendicant from  Rishyamuka mountain. I am a monkey, son of the Windgod and minister to Sugriva. I can assume any form at my free will and go anywhere I like'.
The eloquent Hanuman, having spoken thus to both Rama and Lakshmana, good at speaking, said no more.
Having heard him, the Illustrious Rama cheerfully said to brother Lakshmana standing nearby:
'Here is minister to Sugriva, the great chief of monkeys whom I wish to see.
'O Saumitri, conqueror of enemies this monkey, Sugriva's minister, is skilled in friendly communication. Reply to him in words gentle and sweet.
'Unless wellversed in Rigveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda, for sure, it is not possible for anyone to articulate so well.
'Surely, he seems to have studied well the whole of grammar, for there is not a single mispronunciation in his entire speech.
'His words are auspicious. They are refined. Neither fast nor slow, his utterances captivate the heart.
'His colourful words flow from all the three sources: the bottom of his bosom, his throat and his head. Whose mind will not adore them even if one happens to be an enemy holding a sword?
'O sinless one, how can a king, whoever he be, not accomplish his goal in the past with such an ambassador?
Thus instructed, Saumitri who was equally skilled in speach replied to Sugriva's minister, son of the Windgod
'O learned Hanuman having heard about the virtues of  great Sugriva, lord of the monkeys, we eagerly look forward to meeting him
'O virtuous Hanuman we will do whatever you are saying, for it is the message of Sugriva.
Pleased with Lakshmana's words spoken in a skilful manner, Hanuman, the monkey son of the Windgod, resolved to make friendship with them.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे तृतीयस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the third sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
After listening to the sweet words of Lakshmana, Hanuman, having done what he had to do felt happy and thought of Sugriva.
The great Sugriva, thinks Hanuman, who had done his duty is likely to acquire his kingdom, because great Rama who would help in the work of Sugriva has also come.'
Hanuman, the best of the monkeys, learned in conversation, felt extremely happy and enquired from Rama:
'Why have you come with your brother to this dreadful, inaccessible forest surrounding Pampa, full of different varieties of serpents and wild animals?'
Having listened to Hanuman, and urged by Rama, Lakshmana told him about the great Rama, son of Dasaratha.
'He never hated any one nor did any one ever hate him. To all his subjects, he was like another father, the Creator Brahma. And he was generous in giving gifts while performing yajnas (rituals with fire) like Agnistoma.
'Here is his eldest son, popularly known as Rama. He is the protector of all beings and never failed his father's instructions.
'This glorious Rama was followed by his wife, Sita, like the rays of the effulgent Sun follow him to the end of the day.
'I am his younger brother, called Lakshmana. I have accepted the service of this learned, virtuous and grateful man.
'This man who should have lived in comfort and in reverence, one who was worthy of all the wellwishers lost his wealth and was banished into the forest. He is now deprived of his wife kidnapped by an unknown demon who could assume any form at will.
'Diti's son called Danu who had been cursed to live the life of a demon had said that Sugriva, the best among monkeys, would be able to locate her.
'That Valiant Sugriva can spot the demon who has abducted your wife', said Danu and disappeared happily into heaven shining in brilliance.
'I have given a factual account of everything, since you asked me. Now Rama and I have arrived seeking Sugriva's shelter.
'Having earned supreme fame through his munificence in the past, this lord of the world now craves Sugriva's indulgence.
'One whose father was once a protector of dharma, a refuge to all now seeks Sugriva's shelter.
'This righteous Rama who used to lend in the past protection to the whole world and, indeed, a refuge to all, venerable sir, now seeks Sugriva's shelter.
'This Rama for whose grace the subjects were ever bobolden to him now seeks the favour of the Chief of monkeys.
'Famous in all the three worlds, this Rama, who was the firshborn of Dasaratha, endowed with all virtues and ever respected by all the kings of this earth, now seeks shelter of Sugriva, Chief of monkeys.
'Sugriva, lord of monkeys, ought to help Rama who tormented by, and overwhelmed with, grief seeks his favour.'
To Saumitri who was speaking thus in a piteous tone, his eyes filled with tears the eloquent Hanuman replied:
'It is a matter of great fortune that you who have intelligence, control over your senses and conquered anger have come to see the lord of monkeys who needs instead, to approach you.
'(In fact) seriously offended by his brother Vali who treated him like his enemy and expelled him from the kingdom. He is now abandoned in the forest, his wife hijacked.
'Sugriva, son of the Sungod, along with us will extend all help to you, in your search for Sita.'
Hanuman, having spoken with sweet, gentle words said to the Raghavas, 'We will now go to Sugriva'.
Having offered reverential salutations to Hanuman as per tradition, righteous Lakshmana now spoke to Rama:
'O Raghava this monkey, son of the Windgod appears pleased as evident from his words. As he is a man of action, take your work as accomplished now.
'It is evident from his words  and from his cheerful face that Hanuman is pleased. (I know that) this heroic son of the Windgod will never tell a lie'.
Hanuman, son of the Windgod, endowed with great wisdom carried both the Raghava warriors to the king of monkeys.
Hanuman, who was an elephant among monkeys, gave up the guise of a mendicant, and assuming the form of the monkeys, lifted both the heroes  on to his back and proceeded.
The son of the Windgod, the most valiant, the supremely heroic monkey and the one welladmired, having performed his task, felt immensely happy.And with an auspicious feeling, departed for the great mountain (Rishyamuka) along with Rama and Lakshmana.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किंधाकाण्डे चतुर्थस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fourth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Leaving Rishyamuka, Hanuman reached the Malaya mountain. Seeing the chief of monkeys there, he announced the arrival of  the heroic Raghavas.
'This Rama of greatwisdom and valour, endowed with the power of truth has arrived here along with his brother Lakshmana.
'Born in the Ikshvaku race Rama Dasaratha's son, distinguished for his righteousness is here to carry out the orders of his father.
'While the great Rama armed with selfrestraint was living in the forest, his wife was abducted by Ravana. So he has come to you seeing refuge.
'This Rama, son of a king who had gratified the firegod through many yajnas like  Rajasuya and Aswamedha, gifted hundreds of thousands of cows and ruled this earth with truth and austerity, has come seeking help for a woman.'
'Both the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana seek friendship with you. As both of them are worthiest of worship, welcome them with due reverence.'
Hanuman's words took away Sugriva's great fear for Rama and filled him with cheer. This bull among monkeys gave up his natural appearance and and assuming an attractive human form spoke to Rama lovingly:
'You are a great hero, affectionate to all and wellversed in all dharmas. The son of the Windgod has, in fact, apprised me  of your virtues
'O Lord that you are eager to have friendship with me, who is a monkey is a great honour and is extremely beneficial to me.
'If you are desirous of my friendship, here is my arm (palm) stretched out to you. With due regard, establish our bond firmly, holding my palm in yours.'
Rama became very happy to hear Sugriva's warm words and pressed his hand with his. Delighted, he went close  to Sugriva and hugged him tightly and  affectionately.
Then, Hanuman vanquisher of enemies, gave up his guise of a mendicant, assumed his natural form and generated fire by rubbing two pieces of wood. Wellpleased at heart, he made an offering of flowers to the flaming fire and placed it between them.
They both circumambulated the blazing fire and solemnized their friendship.
Rama and the monkey contented at heart, yet not fully content, continued looking at each other.
'You are a dear friend to me. Your sorrow is my sorrow, your pleasure is my  pleasure. We are one and the same' said Sugriva to Rama, his heart overflowing with happiness.
Then Sugriva cut the branch of a sala tree with luxuriant leaves and flowers, spread it on the ground and sat down along with Raghava.
Then Hanuman, the bull among monkeys, felt very happy, cut the branch of a sandalwood tree full of flowers and gave it to Lakshmana.
Then Sugriva, eyes sparkling with joy, replied to Rama in a sweet, gentle voice.
'O Rama, I have been insulted deeply and my wife hijacked. Stricken with fear I have taken refuge in this inaccessible forest.
'O Rama humiliated by my brother Vali, I have developed enmity with him. Terribly distraught and disturbed I live in this forest in great fear.
'O reverend Kakutstha, I feel helpless with fear from Vali. Save me. You should release me free from fear.'
The righteous and glorious Rama to whom dharma is very dear said to Sugriva with a gentle smile on his face, when he was entreated thus:
'O great monkey I know friendship is the fruit of a beneficial deed. I will kill that Vali who has usurped your wife.
'These arrows covered with kanka feathers, sharp and straight at the tip, comparable to great Indra's thunderbolt are (burning bright) like the sun. Looking like angry serpents, they will unfailingly strike at the miscreant Vali soon.
'With these sharp, serpentlike arrows Vali will be killed. He will fall down on the ground like a mountain shattered.You will see it now'.
Sugriva, very much pleased with the words of Rama, spoke highly (of him).
'O Rama, by your grace I will get my wife and kingdom back. O king accomplish this so that I can destroy my, elder brother, my enemy, O lion among men
While Sugriva was making a friendly alliance with Rama, Sita's left eye, like lotus, Vali's left eye glittering like gold and Ravana's left eye blazing (like fire) twitched at the same time for a moment (Twitching of left eye is considered auspicious to a woman and ominous to a man).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fifth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Sugriva was pleased to say to Rama, delight of the Raghu race once again, 'O Rama, Hanuman, jewel among Ministers, has told me the cause of your coming to this desolate forest. While you were residing in the forest, a demon who was looking for an opportunity carried off your wife, the princess from Mithila, daughter of Janaka, finding her alone. While she was crying (piteously) he killed Jatayu. (the vulture who pretested).
'Very soon you will be relieved of the grief caused by the separation from your wife. Just as Visnu retrieved the Vedas (carried away by the demons, Madhu and Kaitabha) I will deliver her to you.
'O subduer of enemies I will restore her to you even if she is kept in the bowels of the earth or in the vaults of heaven.
'O longarmed Rama, take these words of mine as true. Your consort cannot be absorbed with impunity even by the denizens of heaven including Indra or the ogres on earth any more than food cooked with poison.Give up grief.
'Yes, I remember. I had observed a lady being carried away by a wicked demon. She was crying loudly 'Oh, Rama Oh Rama Oh Lakshmana' in a husky voice. It was Maithili. She was wriggling on the lap of Ravana like a female serpent.
'Seeing me as the fifth member seated on a mountain  she dropped down the auspicious ornaments (bundled) in her veil
'Rama, we have kept  them safely. I will fetch them so that you should be able to identify them.'
Rama then said to Sugriva, one who used pleasing words, 'O my friend why delay? Get them here immediately'.
On hearing this, Sugriva at once entered into the deep cave of the mountain (to get the ornaments and veil) in order to please Rama.
That monkey brought out the veil and auspicios ornaments, showed them to Rama and said, 'Please, see.'
Holding the raiment  as well as the ornaments,  Rama's  eyes were filled with tears.He appeared like the Moon covered with dews.
On account of his deep attachment for Sita, he shed profuse tears. Unable to maintain his natural composure, he sank down to the ground, saying 'O my darling Sita' and cried inconsolably
Pressing the excellent ornaments to his bosom again and again Rama hissed like a cobra provoked in its anthill.
Rama began to wail piteously while tears streamed down his eyes incessantly. He looked at Saumitri standing by his side and said:
'O Lakshmana, behold the veil and the ornaments dropped on the ground by Vaidehi while she was being abducted.
'Sita, for sure, dropped these ornaments on the grassy ground. They are in good shape (without any damage).
Thus addressed by Rama, Lakshmana replied, 'I recognise neither the armlets nor the earrings. I only recognise the anklets as I used to bow at her feet daily.'
Then Rama said to Sugriva,.'Tell me, O Sugriva, to which region that fiercelooking demon has carried away my Sita, who is dearer than my life.
'Let me know where dwells that huge  ogre who has caused this agony to me. I will exterminate all the demons
'By abducting Maithili he has stirred my fierce anger and has opened the door of his death.
'O lord of monkeys tell me the whereabouts of that nightranger who has carried off my darling from the heart of the forest and has harassed her. I will send him now to the abode of Death.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षष्ठस्सर्गःThus ends the sixth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana,  the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.
On hearing the words of Rama in deep distress, the monkey replied to him with folded hands, his throat choked with tears:
'I do not have any knowledge of this sinful demon's dwelling , his capability, his valour or his clan or his despicable lineage.
'O subduer of enemies, give up sorrow. I promise I will make necessary effort so that you will obtain the princess from Mithila.
'With all my capability I will kill Ravana and his clan. Thus I will be able to satisfy you soon with my efforts.
'Give up despair. It is enough. Be patient. Maintain your natural disposition.It is unworthy of men like you to entertain such frivolus thoughts?
'Separated from my wife, I, too, am afflicted with deep grief. But I do not brood, I do not lose patience.
'I am an ordinary monkey born. Even then, I do not brood over my wife. You are highsouled, humble and patient. Why do you grieve?
'Restrain the flow of your tears. Be  patient. Men (like you) endowed with  equilibrium and dignity and patience ought not to leave their composure.
'In times of grief or loss of wealth or at the hour of death, one who is patient does not abandon his wisdom, he does not despair.
'I implore you with folded palms on account of our friendship to show manliness. You should not give in to grief.
'There is no happiness for those who give way to sorrow. Their brilliance is dimmed. Therefore, you ought not grieve.
'Even the chances of survival are doubtful for a man who is overpowered by sorrow. Give up sorrow and have patience, O king
'Out of friendly concern I offer my opinion in your interest. I am not competent to advise you. Respecting my friendship, you should never yield to grief.'
Consoled by the sweet words of Sugriva, Rama wiped his face filled with tears by the hem of his upper cloth.
When lord Rama, the scion of the Kakutstha race was comforted by these words of Sugriva, he came to his senses, and clasping him said:
'O Sugriva you have done what a friend should have done in a befitting manner with your sweet words and good wishes.
'O friend you have guided me back to my senses thus. It is difficult to find a friend like you specially at this time.
'Indeed, you must make effort to trace the princess from Mithila and the evilminded, fierce  demon Ravana.
'Now tell me about my duty without any hesitation. I assure you that your desire will be fulfilled, just as seeds sown in a fertile land with timely rains bear fruit.
'O tiger amongst monkeys accept my words uttered out of injured honour in their true sense.
'I have never uttered a false word earlier nor will I do it in future. This is my promise. I swear by truth alone.'
Sugriva and his counsellors felt glad on hearing Rama's words, particularly  the assurance given by him.
Man and monkey then met privately and shared the weal and woe of one another.
Wise Sugriva, chief of monkeys, heard the words of the magnanimous Rama, a bull among men. He felt glad at heart thinking that his task has been achieved.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventh sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by the sage Valmiki.
Sugriva, the monkey was very pleased with Rama's words and said to him in front of Lakshmana:
'Since one like you endowed with all virtues has become my friend I am (now) worthy of grace of the gods in all respects. There is no doubt.
'O Rama, my sinless Lord, it is possible to attain even the kingdom of the gods with your help, what  to speak of my own kingdom?
'O Rama, since you, born in Raghava dynasty, have become my friend with fire as witness, I have become equally honourable among my relatives and friends.
'You will come to know slowly that I am also a friend worthy of you.It is not proper for me to speak of my qualities( flatter myself).
'The affection of exalted souls is exceedingly stable like the patience of  selfcontrolled and wellcomposed men like you.
'Good friends consider(valuables such as) silver or gold, clothes or ornaments of worldly wealth indivisible.
'Whether rich or poor, afflicted or happy, flawless or guilty, a friend is the ultimate refuge to a friend.
'One will not hesitate to sacrifice wealth or happiness or even life for the sake of a friend like you.'
As wise Lakshmana, brilliant like Indra stood witness, Rama said, 'it is true as you say' to Sugriva who spoke pleasing words.
With mighty Rama and Lakshmana standing by, Sugriva cast his eyes eagerly all round the forest.
Then the chief of monkeys saw a sala tree looking lovely with tender leaves and flowers graced by bees.
Sugriva cut a branch of the beautifully blossomed sala tree with plenty of leaves,   spread it (on the ground) and squatted along with Rama.
Thereafter Hanuman also broke a branch of the sala tree and seated Lakshmana on it.
Now Rama, seated comfortably on the best of mountains overgrown with trees full of flowers and fruits, appeared tranguil like an ocean. Extremely delighted and excited, Sugriva spoke to Rama words that got mixed up with softness and sweetness out of love:
'I am sadly roaming here in the great Rishyamuka mountain, my wife stolen, offended by my brother and frightened.
'O Rama my brother is my enemy. Deceived and threatened by him, I live in the forest stricken with fear and utterly confused.
'O great warrior who can frighten all the worlds scared of Vali, I feel  helpless like an orphan to whom you ought to extend your grace.'
Thus spoken to, the glorious Rama, lover of righteousness who knew his duty, replied to Sugriva with a smile on his face:
'While a friend is known for his help, an enemy is known for his offensiveness. I will this very day kill the one who wrested your wife.
'Here are my highspeed, winged arrows glowing like fierce fire, born out of Kartikeya's bed of reeds.They are smooth and welljointed, decked with gold, comparable in strength to great Indra's thunderbolt, very sharp with pointed tips looking like angry serpents.
'Vali who calls himself your brother is your enemy and a doer of wrong deeds. You will see him crushed, like a mountain shattered, by my arrows.'
On hearing Rama's words, Sugriva, chief of the army of monkeys experienced immeasurable happiness and exclaimed, 'you're great, you're great.'
'Rama I am overwhelmed with sorrow. You are the refuge of the distressed. As you are a friend I ventilate all my grief to you.
'I value your hand of friendship extended to me, with fire as witness more than my very life. I, on my own, offer my pledge of friendship.
His vision blurred, words choked with tears he was unable to speak further.
Quickly Sugriva controlled his tears streaming fast like the rushing river, with patience, Rama seated in front.
Effulgent Sugriva controlled his tears, wiped his bright eyes, took deep breath and said to Rama:
'O Rama I was subjected to the harsh words of powerful Vali in the past when he uprooted me from  the kingdom and threw me out.
'I was robbed of my wife who is dearer than my own life. All my friends were rounded up and imprisoned.
'O Rama this evilminded one made several attempts to kill me. The monkeys he sent to kill me were themselves killed.
'It is because of suspicion that I did not approach you. Every one is scared when there is ample reason to fear.
'Only Hanuman and other chiefs are helping me. Therefore, I am surviving in spite of all difficulties.
'These monkeys out of love for me keep me protected from all sides. They go out with me when it is necessary and stay back whenever I stop (in order to guard me).
'O Rama I tell you (my story) briefly. It is not necessary to go into details. My elder brother Vali, who is known for his prowess, is my enemy.
'My sorrow will go only with his death. My happiness and my life are also subject to his destruction.
'This what I had to tell you out of sorrow. This is how my sorrow will end. In joy and in sorrow your friend is your refuge.
After hearing  Sugriva, Rama said 'I wish to know the actual cause of this enmity.
'On hearing the cause of your enmity and considering your strength and weakness, I will take steps to make you happy.
'On hearing about your humiliation I feel highly agitated at heart. I feel very much angry and restless like the water in rainy season.
'Tell me freely and cheerfully before I string the bow. Your enemy will be destroyed as soon as I release my arrow.'
When the great Rama said this, Sugriva with all the four monkeys felt immeasurably glad.
With a smile on his face, Sugriva started narrating to Lakshmana's elder brother the facts about the cause of his enmity (with Vali).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे अष्टमस्सर्गःThus ends the eighth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
'My elder brother called Vali, capable of exterminating enemies was always highly regarded by my father and me.
'I served him obediently like a servant while he ruled over the great  ancestral kingdom inherited by him.
'Dundubhi's eldest son Mayabi was a mighty demon. He developed bitter enmity with Vali for the sake of a woman.
'One midnight when all were asleep, he (Mayabi) came to the entrance of Kishkinda screaming angrily and bellowing at Vali, challenging him to a duel.
' My brother Vali, who was asleep could not tolerate the frightful sound and jumped out of bed hastily.
'Enraged, he came out to kill the powerful demon even though I with the womenfolk (of the harem) tried to prevent him.
'That mighty warrior(Vali) came out, pushing aside all the womenfolk. I too followed  him due to my affection towards him.
'On seeing my brother and me from a distance, the demon took to his heels scared.
'Frightened, he ran. We too chased him running faster. As the Moon was rising the path was welllit.
'The demon entered into a hole (cave) covered with a heap of grass, difficult, therefore, of access. Both of us reached there and took position.
'Seeing the enemy entering the cave, Vali became wrathful and his senses were terribly disturbed.He said to me:
'O Sugriva wait here at the entrance of the cave and be on your alert until I enter this hole and kill the enemy'.
'On hearing him, I begged the scorcher of enemies (Vali) that I would follow him, but he made me swear on his feet and entered the cave.
'Thinking him dead, I became agitated because of my love for him. My mind began to apprehend his death since I had not seen my brother for long.
'I heard the roaring voices of the demons and not the yelling of my brother engaged in the duel.
'O friend by those signs I understood that my brother was killed and concluding that way I blocked the entrance of the cave with a rock of the size of a mountain and offered oblations to my brother and came to Kishkinda. I intended to hide the fact of Vali's death. But the ministers came to know the truth with their efforts.
'Then all the ministers assembled together and consecrated me. While I was ruling the kingdom lawfully, Vali, the monkey came back after killing the enemy demon.
'Seeing me on the throne, Vali became angry and his eyes turned red. He imprisoned my ministers and spoke to me harshly.
'O Rama even though I was capable of restraining the sinner, my intellect did not let me do so out of respect for my brother.
'When my brother came back to the town after killing the enemy, I offered as usual my salutations to him. But he did not bless me wholeheartedly.
'O lord I bowed at his feet with my crown in total submission. Even then Vali was not pleased a bit. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे नवमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
'I sought to appease my brother who arrived in an agitated state overpowered with anger.
'By providence you have come back safe and the enemy has been killed. You are the only protector to an orphan which I am.
'Here is the manyribbed parasol shining like the full Moon above the horizon and the yak's tailfan held by me.Pray accept it.
'O king I waited at the entrance of the cave for a year. As you did not come out, I felt distressed and my heart sank in great sorrow seeing blood flowing out of the cave. With my senses fused I returned to Kishkinda, closing the entrance with a rock(lest the demon should come out).
'Here I was consecrated by the people and ministers who saw me immersed in grief. It was not my desire to be coronated. Therefore, I may be forgiven.
'You alone are the king and worthy of reverence.I will be the same old brother carrying out my work as earlier. I held the responsibility of the state in your absence forced by the citizens and ministers. The kingdom has been kept stable with the enemies destroyed.
'I am handing over this kingdom which was in trust. O slayer of enemies, O good natured one, give up your anger against me.
'O king I bow my head and beg you with folded hands. The ministers and citizens assembled and forced me to take charge, as the kingdom without a ruler was vulnerable to attack.'
'Even tnough I spoke to him with affection, Vali abused me in many words, saying, 'Fie on you'.
'Having invited ordinary people and favourite ministers he condemned me in the presence of friends.
'You know very well how that wicked demon, Mayabi, that night challenged me angrily to a duel.
'On hearing his words I came out of the royal abode quickly, followed by this wicked brother.
'The powerful demon that night saw me followed by another advancing towards him and fled out of fear. When we chased him, he entered this huge cave in great speed.
'When I saw the dreadful demon entering the great cave, I instructed this cruel brother of mine:
'I cannot return from here without killing him. Wait at the entrance of the cave until I kill him. Look forward to my return.
'Presuming that Sugriva was waiting there, I entered the formidable cave. While I was searching for the demon there, one year passed.
'I could find that fearful enemy there and killed him along with his relatives without any difficulty.
'When there was no response from Sugriva to my repeated call in distress I was very sad.
'I kicked the boulder again and again till it yielded. I came out that way and arrived at the city.
'I was obstructed by wicked Sugriva who forgot his brotherly love and was desiring  the kingdom, which belongs to me.'
'When Vali, the monkey, spoke that way I remained unperturbed. He banished me  with the only cloth I was wearing.
'O Rama my wife has been usurped. There is the fear of his attack. So I am roaming this entire earth, covered with forests and oceans.
'Tormented by the abduction of my wife by Vali, I came to the great Rishyamuka mountain  inaccessible to Vali for some other reason.
'O Rama I have given you this long, full account of the cause of our enmity. For no fault of mine I am suffering.
'O great warrior you are one who can frighten the entire world Due to the fear of Vali I seek your grace.You may resist Vali and provide me security.'
Having thus addressed by Sugriva the righteous and glorious Rama with a gentle smile  consistent with righteousness, started speaking:
'These my sharp, unfailing arrows, bright as the Sun, released by me out of anger will descend on the evildoer, Vali.
'That sinful Vali who has abducted your wife and violated the moral code will live only as long I do not see him.
'Inferring from my own experience, I see that you are immersed in an ocean of sorrow.I will help you cross over and fulfil your desire.'
On hearing his words that boosted his joy and vigour, Sugriva was immensely pleased and said these warm words.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे दशमस्सर्गःThus ends the tenth sarga of Kishkindhakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The words of Rama boosted Sugriva's joy and manliness. He offered him prayers and praise:
'There is no doubt that your sharp, blazing arrows will pierce through the vital parts of the body once you are angry, just as the Sungod burns all worlds at the end of the Yuga.
'In the early hours before Sunrise Vali crosses over the oceans from the west to the east and moving from south to north (performing sandhya) without getting fatigued.
'Climbing up speedily, valiant Vali would catch the huge mountain peaks.
'Vali would break several sturdy trees in the forest with his vigour and speed, exhibiting his strength.
'Massive like the shining peak of mount Kailas and valiant like the mightybuffalo in form, Dundubhi possessed the strength of a thousand elephants.
'Wicked Dundubhi of huge body was proud of his valour and deluded by virtue of the boons, went to the ocean, the lord of rivers.
'Reaching the mighty ocean, he implored the sea with (high) waves and hoards of gems for a fight.
'O king, then the powerful and righteous king of the ocean came out and spoke to the demon (Dundubhi) who was driven to death by fate.'
'You are proficient in warfare. I am not competent enough to challenge you to a duel. But  I will name the one who can.
'Himavan, the supreme abode of ascetics is the fatherinlaw of Lord Siva. He is wellknown as king of mountains, who has, waterfalls, caves, caverns and great forests.He is competent to match your incomparable love for war.
'Dundubhi, the most powerful of demons, aware that the ocean is frightened of him went swiftly to Himavan like an arrow released from a bow. He raised many huge white cliffs of the size of great elephants to the ground and roared.
'Then the gentle Himavan of pleasing appearance stood in the form of a white cloud on the peak and spoke:
'Dundubhi, it is not proper for you to trouble me, for I am devoted to righteousness. I am the resort of ascetics and not adept in warfare'.
'If you are unable or unwilling to fight me out of fear, tell me who wants to challenge me to a duel.
'On hearing such words, which no one had spoken earlier, righteous Himavan, skilful in conversation, flew into a rage and said to Dundubhi,the best of demons:
'Vali, son of Indra, is a wise, powerful and prosperous monkey. He resides at Kishkinda, a city of incomparable glory.
'Vali is profoundly wise, an expert in warfare. He is capable of challenging you to a duel like Indra to Namuchi.
'If you wish to fight, go to him quickly.He is ever heroic and difficult to combat.
'Having heard Himavan, Dundubhi, seized with anger, went to Kishkindha,  the city of Vali.
'Mighty Dundubhi assuming the form of a frightening buffalo with pointed horns looking like a huge, dark raincloud in the sky in monsoon marched to the entrance of Kishkinda and roared like a wardrum as if shaking the earth.
'Dundubhi felled the trees nearby, rent the earth with its hoofs, scratched the entrance gate of the city as an elephant would do with its horns in arrogance.
'Unable to tolerate the sound, Vali jumped out of the harem along with the women like the Moon with stars.
'Vali, king of the monkeys who roam the forest, saw Dundubhi and addressed, but briefly:
'O Dundubhi why are you roaring, blocking the entrance of the city? I know you are powerful. Go and save your life.'
'Dundubhi whose eyes turned red in anger when he heard the words of Vali ,the wise king of the monkeys, said:
'O hero speaking such words in the presence of women is not proper. Come to me for a combat and I will let you know your strength.
'O monkey I will restrain my anger tonight and give you time for your indulgence in sensual pleasures till morning.
'O king of monkeys, hug them and give them any gift you want. Spend the night with your dear ones.
'Have a good look a Kishkinda. Assign some one like you kingship. Sport freely  with women and come, I shall destroy your arrogance.
'Whoever kills a person, who is drunk or is heedless or is asleep or without weapons or stupified by lust in this world, is equal to a killer of a foetus in the womb.'
'Then, Vali sent away Tara and all other women slowly and replied angrily to the foolish demon with a mischievous smile:
'Do not consider me drunken. This drink will serve as a warrior's drink in the combat. Be ready, if you are not afraid of a combat.'
'Having addressed thus in a rage, Vali removed the golden garland gifted by Indra, his father, and stood ready for the combat.
'Vali, the elephantlike monkey then held the mountainlike Dundubhi by the horns and struck him down, roaring loudly.
'Vali whirled him round and round and threw him downroaring. Blood flowed from Dundubhi's ears.
'Each one of them was highly agitated and angry trying to win over the other. A terrific fight took place between Dundubhi and Vali.
'Then Vali who was equal to Indra in prowess fought, hitting him with fists, knees, rocks and trees.
'Then as the monkey and demon fought pouncing on each other, the prowess of Dundubhi got diminished and that of Vali, the son of Indra, increased.
In the fight, Dundubhi fell down, with his strength, courage and prowess dwindled. Vali lifted his huge body and dashed it down on the ground. The body of Dundubhi dissolved into the five elements.
'Mighty Vali lifted on both shoulders the insensate body drained of life and hurled it speedily to a distance of a yojana.
'Scattered by the wind, drops of blood fell at the hermitage of Matanga from the mouth of the deadbody flung.
'The venerable sage became furious to see drops of blood fallen there. He started thinking who could he be?
'Who is that petty, wicked, evil minded one who caused the drops of blood to touch (fall on) me suddenly?
'The venerable sage came out of the hermitage and saw a mountaneous buffalo fallen dead on the floor.
'Having known through his ascetic vision that it was the act of a monkey, he pronounced a curse on Vali who had hurled (the body):
'Whoever has desecrated this forest, protected by me, with drops of blood is forbidden to enter this place. Once he does it, he will die.
'Whoever has broken the trees all over this forest and has thrown the demon's body will not survive if he enters within a radius of one yojana  of my hermitage.
'Indeed his counsellors who are here must leave this forest. Let them depart safely.
'If the monkeys stay back to destroy the leaves and shoots and plunder the fruits and roots of this forest which I have protected just like my son will also certainly invite my curse.
'I give one day's time for the monkeys (to leave). Whomsoever, I see tomorrow will get transformed into a mountain for many thousands of years'
'The monkeys fled on hearing the words spoken by the sage. Said Vali:
'Why have you, residents of the groves of Matanga, come to me? Hope all are safe'
'Then all the monkeys collected together and narrated everything about the curse given to Vali , adorned with a golden chain(on his neck).
'On hearing the monkeys, Vali went to the sage and begged forgiveness with folded hands.
'The sage went into the hermitage without obliging Vali who became apprehensive of the curse of the sage.
'O Lord Rama because of the fear of the curse, Vali will not enter the great Rishyamuka mountain nor will he like to see it.
'O Rama aware of the prohibition of Vali from entering the place, I roam about this great forest  accompanied by my ministers without any apprehension.
'Hurled with the pride of his(Vali's) prowess is this heap of bones of Dundubhi here, which shines like a huge mountain peak.
'Look at these seven sturdy Sala trees with branches  of one overlapping the other.  Vali was able to remove all the leaves of one Sala tree with just one arrow.
'O Rama Vali's strength and fame related by me is unequalled. O king how is it possible for you to kill him in a combat?'
Smiling, Lakshmana asked Sugriva, 'By what action will you trust?. By the fulfilment of which task (by Rama) will you have faith?'
Then Sugriva told Lakshmana that earlier Vali had split through these seven Sala trees one after the other, several times.
'If I see Rama splitting these trees with one arrow, I will believe he can kill Vali with his prowess.
'O Lakshmana and if Rama can also lift the dead buffalo's (Dundubhi's) skeleton and hurl it to a distance  of two hundred bows with one of his feet.
Having said this and thinking for a moment, Sugriva again said to the heroic Rama whose eyes had turned red.
'Powerful Vali is valiant and has killed brave fighters. He is wellknown for his prowess and valour. He has not faced defeat in war.
'Even gods cannot do what he has done. Thinking of all this and being afraid of him, I have taken refuge at Rishyamuka.
'Thinking that this indignant, invincible lord of the monkeys, cannot be overpowered, I have not stepped out of Rishyamuka.
'I have discovered in you a faithful friend. O tiger among men, O venerable one, you are to me like the Himalayas.
'What to do? I know the strength of my mighty bad brother. But so far I have not seen your power in a battle.
'The dreadful acts of Vali have made me feel timid. This is not to compare you with him or your strength with his or insult you and scare you.
'Rama  your word and your courage indicate your supreme strength which is like fire covered with ashes.'
Having heard the great Sugriva, Rama replied with a gentle smile:
'If you have no confidence in my strength in fight, O monkey, I will create it in you so much so that you will admire it.'
Rama,the mighty elder brother of Lakshmana, having said so to Sugriva in a pleasing manner, lifted the dried body of Dundubhi easily with his toe, shook it and flung it with ease to a distance of ten yojanas.
Having seen Rama flinging the body, Sugriva said to him again in the presence of Lakshmanameaningfully:
'O friend, when Vali my brother flung the body, he was tired and intoxicated and the body was fresh with flesh (meaning heavy), but now, O Delight of the Raghu race, it is fleshless and light like a bunch of (dry) grass (for) which you could throw it playfully.
'I was unable to gauge whether your strength is more  than his (Vali's) since there is a great difference between a dry body and a wet one.
'O Dear, therefore, I have my doubt about your relative strength. If you can split a sala tree with a single arrow then can your strength or weakness be demonstrated.
'Now string your bow, draw it like the trunk of an elephant up to your ear and release the great arrow.
'It will be enough and my doubt will be cleared. If you can pierce the sala tree with your arrow it will be my pleasure and not a test of your strength.
'Just as the Sun is the best among the brilliant, the Himalayas among the great mountains, the lion among the quadrupeds, so also you are the best among men of valour.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकादशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends  the eleventh sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.
Having heard Sugriva's pleasing words, the brilliant Rama took up the bow in order to inspire confidence in Sugriva.
Rama, subduer of the enemy's pride, strung his terrific bow, produced the twang that filled all directions, and discharged a single arrow aimed at the sala tree.
Released with great force, Rama's arrow embellished with gold pierced through the seven sala trees and splitting the mountain terrain entered the earth.
In a moment the arrow emerged from the earth which it pierced and reentered the quiver with great speed.
The chief of the monkeys was struck with wonder seeing Rama's arrow piercing through  the seven sala trees so swiftly.
Sugriva was immensely happy and offered obeisance to Rama with folded hands and bowed down and prostrated while his ornaments touched the ground.
Sugriva who stood by, elated to watch the deed of Rama, best among the valiant, proficient in the use of arms of all kinds and knower of dharma, said:
'O bull among men, O lord, you are capable of killing with your arrows even the gods including Indra in the battle, what to speak of Vali.
'O Rama who can in a battle confront you, capable of splitting seven huge sala trees, the mountain and the earth with a single arrow?
'Having found a friend in you comparable to Indra and Varuna, my grief is gone and I am so happy now.
'O Rama, for my pleasure kill Vali who is, to me, an enemy in the guise of a brother. I fold my hands to you.
Then wise Rama embraced handsome Sugriva and replied in these words which were agreeable to Lakshmana:
'O Sugriva, get ready at once. We will promptly proceed to Kishkinda from here. Go ahead and challenge Vali, your brother only in name, to a combat.'
Thay all rushed to Kishkinda, the capital of Vali and waited in the thick forest behind the trees.
Sugriva tightened up his waist cloth hurriedly and roared terrifically as though piercing the sky. And screamed  for Vali.
On hearing his brother roaring, powerful Vali was enraged and rushed like the Sun from behind the western shore of the ocean (this simile suggests the downfall of Vali).
Then a tumultuous combat took place between Vali and Sugriva who looked like the planets Mercury and Mars.
The brothers, insensate with fury, struck each other like thunder with their palms, soles  and fists in the combat.
Bow in hand, Rama watched both the heroes who resembled the twin Aswini Kumaras.
Since Rama was not able to distinguish between Vali and Sugriva, he could not decide whether he should discharge his deadly arrow .
Discomfited  by Vali, and not seeing Rama around, Sugriva ran towards Rishyamuka mountain.
Exhausted, disfigured and body mauled and drenched in blood all over, Sugriva, chased by the infuriated Vali, entered the region of  great sage Matanga.
Effulgent Vali saw Sugriva entering the (prohibited) grove and turned back due to the fear of the curse (of sage Matanga) saying, 'You have escaped'.
Rama together with Lakshmana and Hanuman also arrived at the same gave where  Sugriva was.
At the sight of Rama accompanied by Lakshmana, Sugriva felt ashmed and aggrieved, and looking down on the ground, said:
'You demonstrated your prowess and directed me to challenge Vali and then why did you make the enemy hit me thus?
'Had you, in fact, told me that you were not going to kill Vali, I would not have budged from this place.'
On hearing the great Sugriva's miserable and moving words, Rama again said:
'O dear Sugriva dispel your anger and listen to me why I had not released the arrow.
'O Sugriva in form, ornaments and movements there is perfect resemblance between you and Vali.
'O monkey in your voice, in brightness, in looks, in valour or in words I have marked no difference between you.
'O distinguished monkey you both are so similar in form that I was puzzled and did not release my swift arrow that could have destroyed the enemy.
'I was doubtful because of your similar appearance. I thought that I should not strike at the very root of the interests of both of us. Therefore, I did not release the terrific and deadly  arrow.
'O lord of monkeys I would have betrayed my foolishness and childishness had I exposed you to danger by my ignorance and thoughtlessness.
'It is said that killing a person to whom protection is promised is highly sinful. Lakshmana, darling Sita and me, are under your care and you are our refuge.
'Therefore, O monkey, go and engage yourself in fight again. Do not suspect me. With this single arrow of mine, in one moment you will see Vali thrown down and rolling on the ground in this combat.
'O lord of monkeys while you both are engaged in a duel wear some identification mark by which I can recognise you.
'O Lakshmana this Gajapushpi  in bloom is auspicious. Pluck and fasten it on great Sugriva's neck.'
Then Lakshmana went to the mountain slope, plucked the (creeper with) gajapuspi blossoms and fastened it on the neck of Sugriva.
With the creeper round the neck, Sugriva looked like the raincloud at twilight, adorned by a row of cranes like a garland.
Radiant Sugriva intent on carrying out Rama's words again went to Kishkinda ruled by Vali.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्वादशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twelfth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Lakshmana's righteous elder brother left Rishyamuka with Sugriva for Kishkinda protected by Vali's valour.
Getting ready to go, Rama took up his great bow and arrows adorned with gold and potent in war looking (dazzling) like the Sun.
The strongnecked Sugriva and mighty Lakshmana walked in front of the highsouled Rama.
Brave and brilliant Hanuman, Nala, Nila, and Tara among the leaders of the monkeys  walked behind.
They saw (on the way) trees bent down with the load of flowers, and rivers with pure water flowing into the sea.
(They saw) beautiful valleys, mountains, caves, prominent peaks with deep caverns.
Observing on the way delightful lotus buds with leaves like Vaidurya, clear water and full tanks (They moved on).
Ducks, cranes, swans, vanjulas, waterfowls, chakravakas and other birds warbling melodiously.
They observed deer feeding on tender grass on the ground around without fear, some standing and some roaming the forest
Observing terrific elephants adorned with white tusks wandering alone destroying the tanks, shattering the banks.
(Observing) intoxicated elephants knocking the edges of mountain slopes, elephants resembling (dark) rainbearing clouds, elephants like moving mountains, elephants with dust covered all over the body.
Following Sugriva faithfully, they proceeded swiftly, observing animals of the forest and birds flying in the sky.
While walking fast, looking at the forest full of trees Rama, the delight of the Raghus said to Sugriva:
'This cluster of trees surrounded by plantain groves look splendid like a vast collection of clouds in the sky.
'O friend I wish to know what this is? Could you answer my curiosity?'
On hearing great Rama's words while walking in the extensive forest,  Sugriva started narrating:
'O Raghava this is a hermitage, enchanting with vast gardens and trees bearing sweet fruits, full of tasty roots and water that relieves tiresomeness (of travellers).
'These seven sages used to live on air and that too once in seven nights. They lived for seven hundred years performing penance with motionlessness and attained heaven along with their bodies.
'By virtue of the power of their penance, this hermitage surrounded by a row of trees is impenetrable even for demons and gods including Indra.
'Birds and wild animals avoid the hermitage and whoever enters there out of ignorance never returns.
'O Rama, one can hear pleasant sounds of jingling ornaments (of nymphs), of songs and windinstruments here. One can inhale divine fragrance, too.
'The three sacred fires keep burning and the thick smoke they emit resembles the red feet of  pigeons. It shines forth as if enveloping the treetops.
'These treetops covered with thick smoke glow like mountains of Vaidurya concealed by a cluster of clouds.
'O rigteous Rama you and your brother Lakshmana humbly offer obeisance to them(sacred hermitage and sages Saptajana) with folded hands and meditate on them.
'O Rama, nothing inauspicious happens to them who offer obeisance to those highly spiritual sacred sages.'
Rama and Lakshmana  offered salutations with folded hands in memory of those great sages, great souls.
Righteous Rama, Lakshmana, Sugriva and all the monkeys offered obeisance and proceeded delighted at heart.
Walking a long distance from the hermitage of the seven seers, they beheld the unassailable Kishkinda ruled by Vali.
Rama and Lakshmana of fierce lustre, and the monkeys took hold of the weapons to kill the enemy and reached the capital ruled by the valour of Vali, son of Indra.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रयोदशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirteenth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
They all at once went to Kishkinda ruled by Vali and there waited hiding behind the trees in the dense forest.
Broadnecked Sugriva, a lover of the forest, looked around and flew into a rage.
Sugriva, surrounded by his companions, raised his voice as if piercing the sky, roaring like a huge thundering cloud, challenging Vali to a duel.
Sugriva, proficient in the performance of any task, one who appeared like the rising Sun and moved like a proud lion, said to Rama:
'We have arrived at Kishkinda, the capital of Vali, decorated with flags and having a glittering golden archway that can be opened mechanically. Teeming with monkeys, it looks like a snare to catch the enemy.
'O heroic Rama fulfil quickly the vow taken by you earlier to kill Vali in the same way  a creeper bears fruit when the time comes.'
Requested thus by Sugriva, righteous Rama, the destroyer of enemies, replied:.
'Lakshmana has uprooted a creeper of  gaja, and fastened it on your neck by which you can be easily identified.
'O hero, you are shining with the creeper fastened to your neck , just as the fullmoon adorned with a cluster of stars shines in the sky.
'O monkey, with the release of a single arrow in the combat, I shall dispel your fear and enmity (hatred) for Vali.
'O Sugriva show me your enemy,who is in the guise of your brother.He will be killed. He will roll down in the dust of the forest.
'If Vali appears before me I will not let him go with life.Then you will not blame me and find fault with me.
'You have seen how I have pierced through seven sala trees with a single arrow. You will know how with the same strength I will kill Vali.'
'O Sugriva, I have uttered no falsehood before for fear of deviation from righteousness although I was in distress, nor shall I utter any falsehood in any circumstances hereafter.
'I shall fulfil my promise just as Indra (who performed a hundred sacrifices) helps production in the cornfield through timely rain. Give up your apprehension.
'O Sugriva give a warcry so that Vali adorned with a golden garland will come out.
'Vali, who is proud of  his valour,  is strong, fearless and fond of combat, will rush out of the city in response to your challenge.
'Proud of their own prowess, heroes will not brook the challenge of foes in battle, specially in the presence of women.'
On hearing Rama's words, the goldenhued Sugriva roared in a fierce voice as if it would piece  the sky.
Alarmed at the yelling of Sugriva, the cows began to run in all directions, like the  women of noble pedigree who, with their brightness lost, run perplexed for failure of the king to protect their chastity.
The deer were unable to run like wounded horses in a battle. Birds fell down on the ground like planets fall when their merit is exhausted.
Then Sugriva, son of the Sungod, with his lustre enhanced by his valour moved swiftly. His roar resembled the rumbling of a cluster of thundering clouds. He gave a warcry the tone of which resembled the sounds of waves lashed by high velocity winds in the sea.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुर्दशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fourteenth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The indignant Vali, who was in the harem, heard the roaring of his venerable brother, Sugriva.
The roar (of Sugriva) that frightened all beings gave Vali's vanity a jolt and at once   aroused in him violent rage.
Overcome with anger, Vali looked pale like the eclipsed Sun with the golden radiance faded from  his face.
Vali, who looked fierce with his teeth and whose eyes shone like a flaming fire through anger looked like a pond with the lotuses and their stalks uprooted.
Unable to tolerate Sugriva's roar, Vali stepped out hurriedly, taking long strides as if breaking the earth.
Tara, perplexed out of fear, glanced at Vali lovingly, embraced him and gave him wise counsel:
'O valiant Vali anger has overtaken you like the flood of a river. It is natural for you to be angry at this time, but shake off your anger just as the wise discard a flower  garland already used up.
'O monkey fight him only tomorrow morning. By this you are not going to prove your weakness or increase your respect for the enemy.
'I do not like your rashness. I will explain the reason I am preventing you. Listen:
'Earlier, he (Sugriva) came  and challenged you to a duel. You struck him in anger, and defeated, he fled, running in all directions. Now his challenge rouses my suspicion.
'One who is defeated and badly mauled by you is again coming and inviting you to a duel in this manner arouses suspicion in me.
'His determination, his insolence, his roaring, his arroganceall this cannot be for a small reason.
'Certainly Sugriva has not come here to give a warcry without any external help. The person whose refuge he has sought is not a small one.
'Sugriva is clever by nature. He is wise. Without assessing the ability of the ally he will not enter into friendship.
'O hero I have heard the news earlier from our son Angada. I will tell you what he had heard and what he has said to me:
'When our son Angada was out into the forest he had collected some reports from the spies which he has transmitted to me.
'Rama and Lakshmana, two heroic sons of the king of Ayodhya born of the Ikshvaku race, are invincible in war. They have come there to help Sugriva.
'Rama, famous for crushing foes in war, like the fire that breaks out at the dissolution of the world, has slain strong enemies like Khara and will help your brother.
'He is like a sheltering tree to the virtuous, an ultimate refuge for the destitutes and a protector of the distressed. He is the sole repository of fame.
'He is endowed with the knowledge of science and scriptures. He stood by his father's command. He is like a mine of virtues just as the lord of the mountain is  a mine of minerals.
'Rama is immeasurable in prowess and unconquerable in war. Therefore, enmity with him is not desirable for you.
'O hero, this I tell you not because I dislike you, but because I wish your welfare. Listen, and do as I say
'O king O hero consecrate your brother Sugriva as prince at once. Do not create enmity with him.
'Leave enmity with Sugriva far behind. Make friendship with Rama. I think it is the right thing for you.
'This monkey is your younger brother and, therefore, deserves your protection. Whether he is here or there, he is your brother.
'Indeed I do not see any of your relatives comparable to him on earth. Give up enmity with him. Give him wealth. Give him respect. Keep him by your side.
'Extend your brotherly affection to broadnecked Sugriva. He is always your great relation. There is no alternative for you other than this at present.
'Pray, do me this favour. Treat me as your wellwisher. Heed my  advice given with care.
'Do not lose your temper. Quieten your mind. My advice is beneficial to you. You should not  fight with the prince of Kosala who is comparable to Indra in splendour.It is not proper for you.'
Even though Tara gave good counsel to Vali at the hour of destruction, the advice did not find favour with him as he was under the influence of unfavourable time (seized by death).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चदशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fifteenth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
To these words of Tara with her Moonlike face, Vali replied reproachfully:
'O lady with a charming face why should I tolerate the enemy (Sugriva) who is none other than my own younger brother, especially when he roars excitedly?
O timid lady to swallow insult (without facing the opponent) is worse than death for indomitable heroes (like me) who know no retreat in a battle.
'When the weaknecked Sugriva roars eager to join a duel it is not right on my part to tolerate his arrogance,much less his warcry.
'You need not be concerned about me on account of Rama. How can one who knows dharma and who has a sense of gratitude commit sin?
'Go back with all the women of the harem. Why do you follow me again? Your devotion towards me is evident from the sincere concern expressed by you.
'I shall accept the challenge and fight with Sugriva. Give up your anxiety. I will destroy  his pride, not his life.
'When he faces me in the battlefield, I will hit him with trees and fists, and he will run back  for life.
'That evilminded Sugriva cannot bear my mighty, hard blows. Tara you could shower your affection on me and extend help (in passing secret information obtained through Angada)
'I make a vow even on my life and my victory. Pray return with the retinue. I will be back only after winning the encounter with my brother.
Pleasing in her words, Tara then embraced Vali and sobbing, circumambulated Vali in compliance (to his advice).
The wise counsellor, Tara bade him farewell, wishing him victory and then, overwhelmed with sorrow, entered the inner apartment followed by the womenfolk.
After Tara and other women returned to their abode, Vali departed from the city,  hissing  like a huge angry cobra.
The mighty Vali, breathing heavily, looked around to find where his enemy was.
There Vali saw Sugriva in lustrous, red gold complexion standing ready for a combat steady like glowing fire.
On seeing the great hero Sugriva standing firmly, the enraged Vali tied his upper cloth (around his loin) tightly.
Vali tied up his cloth tightly, raised his fist and advanced towards Sugriva, ready for the encounter.
Sugriva also lifted his fist firmly and advanced more impatiently towards Vali adorned with a golden necklace.
While Sugriva, expert in combat, advanced swiftly to pounce upon (his enemy), Vali whose eyes turned red in anger said:
This infuriated Sugriva who, looking at Vali, said 'This fist of mine will draw your life out, hitting your forehead'.
Struck by Vali, enraged Sugriva encountered Vali more aggresively. His body drenched in blood seemed a mountain with rivulets of blood flowing.
With all his vigour, Sugriva uprooted a sala tree, pulled it out and struck Vali on the body, like a thunderbolt striking a huge mountain.
Struck by the blows of the sala tree, Vali also lost his balance like the heavily loaded ship of a trader shaken up in the ocean.
Both of them endowed with terrible strength, fierce in appearance, and each seeking the weak points of the other advanced, as fast as Garuda, striking at the enemy. Their fight grew more and more fierce like the fight between Sun and Moon in the sky.
In a short while Vali, endowed with great strength, gained the upper hand and Sugriva, son of the Sungod, was losing ground .
With his strength waning and pride crushed, Sugriva, anguished, exhibited shrewdness.
Both like Vritra and Indra fought, hitting each other again and again with trees full of branches and tops, with their hard nails akin to thunderbolts and with their fists, knees, feet, etc.
The monkeys, wanderers in the forest, both with blood stains fiercely clashed pointing at each other, roaring with dreadful sounds like two clouds.
Raghava perceived that the monkey king Sugriva whose strength was waning was looking again and again in all directions (seeking help).
Finding the king of the monkeys in distress, the heroic, brilliant Rama looked for an  arrow in order to kill Vali.
Rama then fixed an arrow which resembled a venomous snake, on to his bow looking like the very deathwheel of Yama and stretched it fully.
As if scared by the twang of the bowstring, winged and feathered birds and animals ran frightened in different directions.
As Rama shot the mighty arrow, it went like a blazing lightning with a thunderous sound and pierced into the chest of Vali.
Then the powerful monkey king Vali, who was proud of his might, fell down on earth, struck by the fast flying arrow.
Vali fell lustreless on the ground. He was thrown down unconscious like the banner (hoisted in honour) of Indra on the fullmoon day of Aswayuja month.
The arrow of Rama, distinguished among men, adorned with silver and gold, which could crush the enemy shone like fire and smoke emitted from the mouth of Rudra at the time of dissolution (at the end of the aeon).
A tyrant in war, Vali struck by4.54.24 Rama's arrow, collapsed instantaneously like a tree felled down.
Adorned with shining gold ornaments,Vali fell down with all his limbs touching the ground like Indra's flag when its ropes are loosened.
When the lord of the monkey troops fell down, it was as though the earth lost its brightness like the sky loses its brightness devoid of the Moon.
Even though the highsouled Vali's body had fallen on the ground, its  splendour, glow, life and valour had not left it.
As the most beautiful golden necklace, studded with diamonds, given by Indra was there on him, the life, brightness and splendour of Vali's body remained.
Vali, the chief hero of the monkeys, with his golden necklace appeared like the raincloud hallowed by the glowing twilight.
Even though he had fallen down, the effulgence of his necklace on his body, and the arrow pierced into his vital parts remained.
Rama's arrow released paved the way to heaven which was that hero's supreme destination.
Rama followed by Lakshmana slowly approached the longarmed, lionchested, brightfaced, tawnyeyed Vali, and admiringly observed this unchallengeable son of Indra, unassailable like Indra himself. Adorned with a golden necklace, he had fallen on the ground like fire without flame, like king Yayati descended on the earth from the celestial realm on the exhaustion of his merits, or like the Sun cast down on the earth at the end of the aeon.
On seeing powerful Rama and Lakshmana approaching,Vali spoke with pride and rigteousness to Rama, 'You are a prince, born of a noble family, son of a renowned king. You are famous, brilliant, handsome and follower of good practices.Having hit me when I was engaged otherwise in an encounter what merit have you gained?'
'O king selfcontrol (of organs of action and sense organs), righteousness, steadfastness, truthfulness, valiance and capacity to punish the offenders are virtues  of a king.
'Believing that you are a repository of all these virtues are in you, and respecting your noble lineage I engaged in a duel with Sugriva even though I was forewarned (by Tara).
'I did not know that you have killed your soul (by acting against your conscience), that you are sinful in conduct and unrighteous under the show of virtues like a well, its mouth covered with grass.
'You are a sinful man covered with the mask of piety thus resembling a hidden fire. I failed to recognise that righteousness is a mere pretext for you.
'I did no harm to your affairs or to your city. I did not insult you. Why did you choose to kill me, a monkey roaming in the forest and living on fruits and roots? I was not fighting you. Why did you come and strike a person like me?
'O prince, you are son to a king, handsome and famous. Even signs of righteousness are discernible in you.
'Who, born in a kshatriya family, versed in the Vedas and free from doubt will commit such a cruel act under the guise of righteousness?
'You are born in a royal family. You are wellknown. You are proficient in dharma. Yet you are unworthy  of your race and robe.
'Conciliation, generosity, forbearance, righteousness, truthfulness, steadfastness in valour and punishing offenders are the hallmarks of rulers.
'O Rama we are mere animals wandering in the forest and living on roots and fruits. This is our nature. (But) you are a lord of men.
'We fight for land or gold or silver. What did you fight me for, for what I have or for the fruits of the forest?
'Submissiveness and modesty are the attributes of good rulers and should not be mixed up with benevolence and selfrestraint. Kings ought not to act (as they like) impulsively.
'Fulfilling your own desire is important for you. You are wrathful and unstable with royal course of conduct. Your business is with your bow and arrows.
'O lord of men you have no faith in righteousness, no steadfastness in the acquisition of wealth. You have no control over the senses. You are overcome by delusion.
'O scion of the Kakutsthas Having killed me here with your arrow even though I have done you no harm, you have perpetrated an abominable act. How will you defend yourself in the midst of holy men after commiting such a sinful act?
'One who kills a king, a brahmin or a cow, a thief or one who delights in destruction of life an atheist or one who marries before his elder  they all go to hell.
'My skin is not fit to be worn by the virtuous, my hair and bones are also prohibited from any use. My flesh is also not at all fit to be eaten by righteous people like you
'O Rama brahmins and kshatriyas are permitted to eat only the five nailed animals the porcupine, the hedgehog, the alligator, the rabbit and the tortoise.
'O king the learned do not even touch my skin or bone. They do not eat my flesh. While it is so, you have unnecessarily killed me, a fivenailed animal.
'Tara knew everything. Her words were correct. They were meant for my wellbeing. However, due to my ignorance (or arrogance), I did not heed her words and fell under the sway of the lord of death
'O Kakutstha just as a wife endowed with good character cannot be protected by a wicked husband, you cannot be a protector of this earth.
'You are treacherous, dishonest, mean, guised with false humility and a sinner to the core. How were you born to that highsouled Dasaratha?
'Breaking through the chains of good character, trespassing the moral code of conduct of the sages, discharging the sharp arrow of righteousness, the elephantine (arrogant) Rama killed me.
'You have committed an inauspicious, improper act, despised by the virtuous. What will you speak when you are questioned by noble men for committing such an act?
'O king you have exhibited your valour against one who has done you no harm. Why have you not shown such valour on those who have offended you?
'O prince had  you fought me face to face you would have seen Vaivasvata, the lord of death today (you would have been killed by me).
bitten to death by a snake while fast asleep.
'Had you sought my help earlier(before you met Sugriva), I would have restored Sita to you within a single day. I have been killed by you to oblige Sugriva. I would have handed over Ravana by the neck after killing him in the battle.
'Even if she were hidden in the waters of the ocean or in the underworld, I would have brought her by your order like Sweta to Aswatari or Hayagriva. (Hayagriva, an incarnation of Visnu brought Vedas stolen by demons, Madhu and Kaitabha from Patala or the netherworld)
'Sugriva inheriting the kingdom after my departure to heaven is proper. But your killing me this way in the combat by unjustifiable means is not.
'Indeed, in the world people meet with death when the time comes. Hiding yourself (from me) you have achieved it. Is it proper for you? You may think over and give your reply.'
To these harsh words though seemingly wellmeaning, courteous and righteous, Vali who had been mortally wounded and confused in mind, Rama replied:
To righteous Vali,the best of the monkeys, the lord of the monkeys, who looked like the Sun shorn of his brilliance or a raindrained cloud or a fire that had been extinguished. Rama, under the scanner, said in reply:
'Without correct knowledge of dharma, artha, kama and worldly ways, how do you reproach me bitterly now in total ignorance?
'O gentle Vali why do you speak with monkeyish frivolousness, without consulting the elders and teachers endowed with intelligence?
'This earth including mountains, groves and forests, animals, birds and humans belongs to the Ikshvaku kings.The right of purnishment and reward also vests with them.
'Bharata, righteous, truthful, upright, knower of dharma, artha and kama and dispenser of punishment and rewards, rules this earth.
'Bharata in whom justice and discipline, truth and courage along with the knowledge of time and place for action are firmly rooted is king (of this earth).
'Following his command, in confirmity with dharma we and the other kings also move all over the  entire world desirous of promoting dharma.
'Who can stray from the path of dharma when the whole world is ruled by Bharata, a tiger among kings, and a lover of dharma?
'By the command of Bharata ,all of us are devoted to our duty of upholding dharma and virtue and duly punish those who deviate from the path of dharma.
'You have violated dharma. You stand condemned for your actions. Passion is your priority. You have strayed from the right path of kings.
'O monkey dharma is very subtle. It is extremely difficult to understand. Installed in the hearts of all living beings the self knows good and evil (soul is the witness of good and evil).
'You are fickle by nature. Your consultants are frivolous, pettyminded monkeys. It is like one born blind suppporting another blind by birth. What do you know (about dharma)?
'I shall explain to you clearly (the reason for striking you down). It is not proper for you to despise me with mere anger and malice.
'Now know the reason why I struck you down. Having abandoned the eternal  law, you are living with your younger brother's wife.
'You are a sinner, since you live with Ruma, who is your virtual daughterinlaw, when the great self Sugriva is alive. (A younger brother is like a son and his wife, a daughterinlaw).
'O monkey since you have violated morality by sinning against your brother's wife this punishment is justified.
'O lord of monkeys I do not see any other way of controlling a person excepting punishing the one who has acted against dharma and swerved from the accepted code of conduct.
'I am a kshatriya born of a good family. I will not pardon you for your sin. Whosoever transgresses dharma against his own daughter, sister or brother's wife out of lust should be killed according to smriti.
'Bharata is a king and we follow his command. How can you, who have strayed from dharma, go unpunished?
'Wise Bharata being a respectable king rules by dharma. By the command of Bharata, we are bent upon punishing those who have strayed from dharma  by being addicted to sensual pleasures.
'O Vali we have to follow Bharata's command and are bent upon punishing those wicked people who deviate from the bounds of dharma.
'My friendship with Sugriva is as strong as that with Lakshmana. Its motive is the recovery of his wife and sovereignty. I have  promised this to him in the presence of monkeys. How can a pledge remain unhonoured by a person like me? How is it possible?
'Knowing all these reasons(many violations of dharma), it is proper for you as a king to approve of the punishment accorded to you in consonance with dharma.
'Punishment given to you should be viewed as a right course of action in all respects. This is the duty of a trustworthy friend who follows dharma.
'You should also have acted in that manner considering dharma. Now listen to what Manu said, in two verses that hold good traditions dear which are accepted by men wellversed in dharma. O monkey the action taken by me is in conformity with this.
'Men who have perpetrated sins should be subjected to punishment by kings so that they become stainless and attain heaven like pious men who have performed good deeds.
'In the past a similar sin was perpetrated by Sramana, a revered soul (mendicant) and Mandhata, a noble king of my race inflicted terrible punishment on him.
'Vicious deeds have been committed by others when the kings were not watchful. Kings punish such sinners when they are vigilant. Otherwise they have to atone for their negligence.
'O tiger among monkeys do not regret. Your death has the sanction of dharma. We are under the control of sastras. We are committed to them. We do not have the freedom to act independently.
'O hero O best of monkeys listen to me. I will give you one more reason. On hearing it, I hope you would not be angry with me.
'O best of monkeys I have no mental agony nor do I regret in this case. Hidden from view or out in the open, people catch animals by means of snares or ropes or through other tricks.
'People seeking animal flesh for food kill animals alarmed or unalarmed, animals that run away or animals that stand still. They kill animals whether they are alert or not and no blemish is attached.
'O monkey even royal saints wellversed in dharma go for hunting. I struck you down with an arrow whether you were fighting with Sugriva or not, since you are a monkey. (You can be hit whether you are fighting face to face or not).
'O best of monkeys kings are donors of dharma, life and auspiciousness to people which is difficult to acquire. There is no doubt about it.
'One should not insult kings, nor shout at them, nor disregard them nor speak unpleasant words to them. They are gods in human form moving on this earth.
'Seized with improper anger, you are reproaching one who is devoted to dharma, without knowing that I follow the code of conduct that has been passed on by my fathers and forefathers.'
Vali was very much pained to hear Rama. He became free from confusion regarding dharma and no longer found fault with Rama.
Thereafter Vali offered obeisance with folded palms to Rama, saying, 'O best among men whatever you have spoken is undoubtedly true.'
In Progress
'You are a wise man given to truth and righteousness.You remain devoted to people's wellbeing. As you know for certain about cause and effect your intellect is sound and words pleasant.
'O knower of dharma, I did not follow dharma in the past. I have trangressed the bounds of dharma. Say, you have pardoned me, protect me in a righteous manner.
'I neither grieve for myself nor for Tara nor for my kinsmen. But I do for my son Angada adorned with golden armlets. He is embellished with all virtues.
'I loved him very much from his childhood. He will grow depressed in my absence. He will become like a pond whose waters have been dried up.
'O Rama he is my only son through Tara and dear to me. He is young,innocent but strong.He  deserves to be protected by you.
'Shower equal affection from your heart on Sugriva and Angada. You are their protector and punisher also. You know what should and should not be done.
'O lord of men may you have the same kind of affection for Sugriva and Angada as you have for Bharata and Lakshmana.
'I hope Tara will not be made to suffer because of my offence. Make Sugriva not to run wretched Tara down.
'It is possible for a person favoured by you to rule the kingdom.It is possible for one who is under your control and acts according to your will to rule the entire world and earn heaven.
'Even though I was prevented by Tara, I came for a duel with Sugriva since I wished to die in your hands.' Having spoken thus to Rama, Vali fell silent.
Now Vali was able to see clearly. Rama consoled him with words of peace and tranquillity, truth and righteousness.
'O best of monkeys, abandon all your anxiety on this score. Bother not about us or about yourself. Whatever has happened, has happened in consonance with dharma.
'The sinner and the punisher, whoever gives punishment and whoever receives it, are both regulated by the law of cause and effect. So do not despair.
'You have been purged of your sin through punishment from the point of view of righteousness. You have regained your spiritual nature on the path of dharma.
'O best of monkeys remove sorrow from your heart, delusion and fear. It is not possible for you to transgress fate.
'O lord of monkeys Angada will remain with Sugriva and with me as he used to live with you. Rest assured.'
Having listened to the sweet, wellcomposed words of great Rama, a crusher of the enemy in war ,follower of righteous path, Vali replied in appropriate manner:
'Pray, O mighty prince, hero of immense valour, pardon me for the words of blame I unwittingly hurled at you. I said all that in excruciating pain caused by your mighty arrow and in confusion of what is right and what is wrong.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे अष्टादशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eighteenth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.
The king of monkeys lying on the ground struck by the arrow did not offer to reply after listening to Rama's appropriate answers (to his objections).
Severely battered by stones, hit by trees and pierced by Rama's arrow, Vali lost consciousness as the end of his life was nearing.
Tara, wife of Vali, heard that her husband, tiger among monkeys, was killed in the battle by the arrow discharged by Rama.
Hearing the terrible, unhappy news of her husband's death, Tara anxiously rushed along with her son out of the mountain cave.
Alarmed at the sight of Rama holding the bow, the terribly courageous monkeys who followed Angada as his bodyguards ran in different directions.
Tara saw the terrorstricken monkeys running helterskelter, like the herd of deer whose leader who had strayed had been killed.
Sorrowful Tara, the wife of Vali, duly approaching the monkeys stricken with grief and running as if chased by the arrows of Rama at their back, said to them:
'O monkeys deserting the lion among kings,whose servants you are ? What should you  be frightened for ? Why run away in distress?
'If the (elder) brother is struck down by his (younger) brother in anger for the sake of kingship using farreaching arrows discharged by Rama, why are you running?'
On hearing Tara, the wife of Vali, the monkeys who could assume any form at their will replied with clear words appropriate to the occasion:
'O mother, your son is still alive. Go back and protect your son Angada. Lord of death in the form of Rama has come and killed Vali and is carrying him away.
'Rama smashed the trees and stones Vali hurled at him and then struck him down with thunderboltlike arrows.
'When Vali who was equal to Indra in strength, a tiger among monkeys, was killed, the army of monkeys got terrified and ran away here and there, scattered in different directions.
'Let the gate of the city be shut and Vali's son be consecrated as king. All the monkeys will serve him when he assumes power.
'O lovely Tara, this very day other monkeys will soon occupy our citadels.
'There are monkeys wandering in the forest (sent away by Vali). Some of them have made others' wives their own and some have been separated from their wives. They are a great cause of fear.'
Hearing the words of the pettyminded monkeys, Tara spoke to them in her own way with a gentle smile:
'Now that the glorious Vali, a lion among monkeys, my husband is dying, of what purpose is the son, or the kingdom or my own life?
'I will seek the soles of the feet of the great soul who has been killed by the arrow discharged by Rama.'
So saying, the griefstricken, weeping Tara hastened, sadly beating with both hands her head and her chest.
As she was nearing (the spot) she saw her husband, a great conqueror of monkeys who never retreated  from the battle, mortally hit and fallen on the ground.
Vali who used to hurl huge mountains like Indra discharges thunderbolts, who had the speed  of wind of high velocity, who would roar like huge thundering clouds,
(Vali) who was equal to Indra in prowess looked like a huge monsoon cloud that had calmed down after pouring all water, a roaring warrior who could frighten others,  struck down by another warrior,  appeared like a lion killed by a tiger for the sake of meat
Vali looked like a chaitya (a tree of worship) having a banner and altar and reverentially  worshipped by the entire world, but destroyed by Garuda on account of a serpent (hidden in it). (Here Rama is Garuda, Sugriva, serpent and Vali a sacred Chaitya)
The auspicious lady Tara beheld Rama standing there firmly with his brother and Sugriva, leaning on the best of bows.
Passing Rama and Lakshmana, she went near her husband killed in the combat. She was full of agony to see him. Deeply agitated in the mind, she fell down on the ground.
Tara got up again, as if she woke up from sleep and addressing her husband garlanded with death, lamented.
Seeing Tara crying like a female osprey and Angada following her in despair, Sugriva felt pain (at heart).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the nineteenth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Beholding her husband lying on the ground pierced by a deathdealing arrow released by Rama, the lovely moonfaced Tara went and embraced him.
Beholding Vali, the lord of monkeys, who was strong as an elephant, splendid as a mountain, fallen down like an uprooted tree, struck by the arrow, Tara became restless and wailed bitterly:
'O valiant hero, lord of monkeys you were terrifying in war. Why don't you speak now to me so forlorn and helpless?
'O tiger among monkeys get up. Come and sleep on the best of beds. Best of kings, you should not lie on the ground.
'O lord of the earth I know you loved the earth more than you loved me since you have forsaken me and enjoy her company by hugging her with your limbs, even after death.
'O my heroic husband, you are the legitimate, righteous king of Kiskinda. You have evidently built another beautiful city Kiskinda on your way to heaven.
'Our pleasure trips to sweetscented forests have ended now. You have brought them to a close.
'You are the leader of leaders. Now that you have attained heaven I am bereft of all joy,   plunged in a sea of grief.
'I presume my heart is strong, for it has not broken into a thousand pieces, even though I am overwhelmed with grief to see my husband fallen on the ground.
'O king of monkeys you have banished Sugriva. You have usurped his wife. This is the fruit  of your action.
'O lord of monkeys wishing your wellbeing I tendered salutary advice. But out of delusion you despised them.
'O venerable one you will surely churn the minds of the kindhearted celestial nymphs who are endowed with youth and beauty.
'No doubt time is inexorable. The time of your death had surely arrived.Now you, whom nobody could control, have come under the sway of Sugriva.
'I have not experienced poverty or suffering before. Immersed in grief, like an orphan, now I am reduced to the pitiable condition of a widow.
'To what plight will the tender Angada, who has been tended affectionately and deserves comforts, be reduced when his uncle displays anger?
(Turning to Angada Tara said) 'O son, look at your father, a lover of dharma. See him, as it will be difficult to see him later, dear'.
'O lord you have set out on a long journey. Kiss your son on the forehead, enjoy its sweet smell, console him and give him your message.
'Indeed, Rama has achieved a great feat in fulfilling his promise to Sugriva. He is acquitted of the debt by killing you.
'(Now turning to Sugriva she said) O Sugriva your enemy brother has been killed and your desire has been fulfilled.You will get back Ruma and enjoy the kingdom without any obstacles.'
'(To Vali she said) O lord of monkeys Why don't you speak to me loving words when I am wailing this way? Here are your excellent wives'
On hearing the wailing of Tara, all the other wives of Vali held the piteous (in their arms) Angada and wailed, overwhelmed with sorrow:
'O hero, adorned with armlets, why have you departed on a long journey, deserting your dear son Angada who possesses similar virtues like you? It is not proper.
'O darling, attractively dressed, you are leaving me and Angada and going too far.  What unpleasant deeds we have done (to deserve this).
'O longarmed chief of the monkey clan O warrior pardon me any wrong done unknowingly, inconsiderately. I touch your feet with my head.'
Thereafter Hanuman, leader of the monkey clan, slowly consoled Tara who was (standing before her husband) like a star fallen from the sky.
'On departing from this mortal world an embodied soul reaps gradually the good and evil fruits of action performed under the notion of virtue or vice with an eye to their good or evil consequences.
'For whom do you grieve except for yourself? You are miserable. Who are you sympathising with? Who are you grieving for? When this body itself  is like a bubble, who is worth grieving for?
'You are mother of a surviving son, Angada. You have to look after him in times to come. Think of the duties to be performed now.
'You are aware of the uncertain and transient happenings in the lives of living beings. Therefore, a wise lady should do auspicious work in this world.
'Tens of millions of monkeys depended on this hero with their hopes on him. He has reached his ultimate destiny now to enjoy the fruits of his good deeds.
'This hero with a right vision, adopted the means of conciliation, charity and forgiveness (in his administration) and has finally reached a position through righteousness in his death. It is not proper to mourn for him.
'O blemishless lady these great monkeys including your son Angada and the entire kingdom of monkeys and bears are under your protection.
'O fair sex Encourage these two griefstricken heroes (Angada and Sugriva) gently. Let Angada rule this earth under your protection.
'Let all the rituals of the king of vanaras be performed. Let Angada be consecrated. You will attain peace of mind to see your son seated on the throne.'
On hearing Hanuman's words, Tara, tormented by the death of her husband said to Hanuman who was waiting for her reply:
'To embrace even the deadbody of this hero is better than (to embrace) a hundred prototypes of Angada.
'O Hanuman the best of monkeys, you need not think about (the future of) Angada. A father plans for a son and not (even) the mother.
There is nothing more befitting for me than joining the king of monkeys either here or in the next world. It is proper for me to resort to this resting place (pyre) used by this slain hero in front of me.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyfirst sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Vali, gazing all around, breathing slowly and sighing feably beheld Sugriva at first instance, Sugriva who was standing in front of his own son.
Vali, the lord of monkeys, lovingly said to Sugriva, who had won a victory:
'O Sugriva you ought not to accuse me of exiling you, and wresting your wife. My mind was deluded by the force of fate that controls one's future.
'O dear I believe that both of us are not destined to enjoy the love and happiness that come together to brothers.
'I am leaving this world soon, along with this vast kingdom, prosperity and untarnished fame.
'O warrior king you should do whatever I request you at this hour even though it may not be easy.
'Look at this young Angada fallen on the ground, face flooded with tears. Raised with comfort, he deserves to be kept happy.
'He is dearer to me than my life. Take care of him like your own son. He is separated from me. Take care of him in all respects, so that he is not deprived of anything.
'O lord of monkeys from now on, you alone will be his father, provider of everything, saviour and protector in danger.
'This prosperous son of Tara, your equal in valour, will remain with you in the forefront to crush demons.
'This mighty hero Angada, son of Tara, is young and dynamic. He will strike (the enemy) in a fitting manner in war.
'Tara, daughter of Sushena, is wise and efficient in discerning subtle matters and in foreseeing unexpected events.
'Tara's opinion is never wrong. It does not change. Whatever she speaks is right and should be carried out without any doubt.
'You ought to carry out Rama's work without hesitation. If you do not, it will be unrighteous and harmful.
'O Sugriva put on this divine golden necklace. It has great brilliance. Its present lustre may be gone when I am dead.'
Thus spoken to by Vali with brotherly affection, Sugriva gave up joy (of victory) and appeared dull like the Moon eclipsed by planet Rahu.
On hearing Vali's words, Sugriva became composed with no illfeeling. Considering it to be proper, he received with his permission the golden necklace.
Having given the golden necklace to Sugriva,Vali, feeling ready to depart, looked at his son Angada who stood by and spoke affectionately:
'Enduring pleasure or pain equally  with due regard to time and place favourable to you or otherwise, you should submit to the will of Sugriva.
'O longarmed one you have always been affectionately brought up by me. Sugriva may not rear you that way.
'O conqueror of foes do not align with his enemies or with the friends of his enemies. Remain selfrestrained and loyal to Sugriva. Be subordinate to his will.
'You are not to be excessively friendly or otherise as both are serious mistakes. Therefore, be insightful.'
Having spoken this, tormented by the arrow, eyes popping out and his dreadful teeth ejected, Vali remained drained of life.
Then the best of the monkeys and their troop leaders bewailed the death of Vali, crying bitterly.
Lord of monkeys having gone to heaven, Kishkinda looked desolate including the pleasure gardens, the mountains and forests. The monkeys also became dull.
(The vanaras wailed aloud saying) 'The forests and gardens looked connected together with the flowers that swayed by his speed .Who can do that now?
'Great soul, Vali endowed with stout shoulders joined a duel with a gandharva called Golabha for fifteen years nonstop night and day.
'In the sixteenth year Golabha, the uncontrollable enemy was killed by Vali with his dreadful fangs and rendered protection to everybody. How did he get killed?'
Just as the cattle get frightened when the leader of the herd gets killed in a huge forest full of lions, the young monkey became puzzled when the chief of monkeys got killed.
Tara kissed (smelt) the forehead of the king of monkeys who had departed and said:
'O hero, not caring for my words (of caution), you are now lying with great pain on hard stones on the ground.
'O lord of monkeys you lie in the end, embracing the earth and not replying to me. Surely you deem this earth dearer than me.
'O lover of brave deeds, fate has brought you under the sway of Sugriva, although he had lost to you.
'Oh powerful Vali leaders of the bears and monkeys, the entire lot are standing near you, wailing. Angada has been  crying in grief. How is it that you are not rising up even after hearing their wailing voices and  my call? .
'Earlier you have killed enemies in combats and made them lie down where now you lie.
'O venerable hero, born in a pure and noble family, you are a lover of battles. Now you have left me an orphan.
'It is said by wise men that a girl should not be given in marriage to a warrior. See me,  the wife of a warrior, now rendered a widow.
'My pride is crushed. My husband, the ultimate resort for me is shattered.I am plunged in a vast, bottomless ocean of grief.
'My heart is surely made of hard stone yet it has not split into a hundred pieces even on seeing my husband slain৷৷
'He was my husband, my friend and naturally my loving king. He was powerful in battle.Alas the hero has died.
'Even if a woman without husband, is blessed with sons and abundant wealth and grain, still learned people call her a widow.
'O hero how is it that you are lying in a crimson bed of the pool of blood flowing from your body?
'O bull among monkeys how can I embrace you with my arms as your body is covered with dust particles and blood?.
'Sugriva has achieved his goal in his dreadful enmity (with you). His fear is dispelled by a single arrow released by Rama.
'The arrow which has pierced your body prevents me from embracing you. I am only looking at you lying (not removing the arrow lest you die).'
Then Nila took out the arrow from Vali's heart with due effort as one would pull out a glowing serpent hidden in the mountain cave.
As the arrrow(drenched in blood) was being pulled out, its glow looked like the Sun's rays obstructed by the peak of the western mountain.
The streams of blood that flowed all over from the wounds of his body appeared like streams of water mixed with red and copper colour.
She (Tara) wiped the body wounded with the weapon and covered with wardust,  sprinkling her tear drops from her eyes.
Turning to the body of her husband fully drenched in blood, thus spoke Tara to her tawnyeyed  son Angada:
'O son you see the most terrific end of your father on whom enmity forced sinful deeds.
'O son offer salutations to your venerable father, the king, departing for the abode of Yama (lord of death) looking (red with blood) like the rising Sun.'
Thus advised by Tara, Angada got up, clasped his father's feet with his stout arms, and saluted, saying, 'I am Angada.'
'Why do you not, with the words 'May you live long'', bless, as before, your son Angada who is greeting you? (said Tara).
'Just like a cow followed by its calf would attend upon a mighty bull struck by a lion I will wait with my son upon you who have lost consciousness (died).
'You have performed a warsacrifice. You have bathed in the waters of Rama's weapon signifying the end of the sacrifice. How did you take this customary bath without me, your wife?
'Why do I not see on your chest the golden necklace gifted by the king of the gods (Indra), pleased with you in the battle?
'O venerable one, even though life has departed from you, kingly glory does not leave you any more than the light of the setting son leaves the king of mountains. (western mountain)
'You have not followed my advice. I did not have the capacity to prevent you from going to war. The result is, you are killed and I am ruined along with my son. The goddess of fortune also is deserting me as well as your son.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रयोविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentythird sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Sugriva, the unassailable younger brother of Vali, perceiving Tara overwhelmed in the ocean of grief felt agonized for the killing of his brother of incomparable power.
Face drenched with tears, highly sensitive Sugriva glanced at Tara for a moment. Pained and depressed at heart, and surrounded by attendants, he slowly approached Rama.
Duly approaching the illustrious Rama, endowed with auspicious signs, who stood with his bow and serpentlike arrows, Sugriva thus submitted:
'Your majesty you have struck down Vali as promised and the consequences of your action are seen now. O prince, however, my mind is not interested in the enjoyment of pleasures. I have no interest in life.
'O Rama when the queen (Tara) is weeping, plunged in deep sorrow, the entire city is lamenting in agony, my elder brother is dead and the survival of Angada is uncertain, my mind no longer longs for the enjoyment of the kingdom.
'O prince of the Ikshvaku family, the anger due to my exilement and my intolerance of his harsh words, had made the killing of my brother agreeable to me earlier. Now that the leader of the monkey clan is killed I am  intensely hurt.
'I now feel dwelling long on the great mountain Rishyamuka  as usual and somehow  eking out a livelihood is preferable to attaining heaven as a sequel to the death of my brother.
'O Rama when the wise, highsouled Vali said to me, 'I do not like to kill you in this place be gone from here', his words reflected his nobility. This action of mine (killing of Vali) is, on the other hand, in consonance with my nature.
'O Rama prompted by passion, without thinking of the difference between obtaining the kingdom to satisfy one's desire and the consequent grief, which brother would  be willing to kill his virtuous elder brother?
'The idea of killing me was not acceptable to his noble nature, while my wicked thought caused his death.
'When my brother hit me with the branch of a tree I screamed for a while. But he pacified me and said it was improper and he would not repeat it.
'Thus while nobility, a feeling of respect,brotherliness and duty was shown to me by my brother, I exhibited wrath, passion and  frivolity, the nature of the monkey.
'O king  just as Indra committed sin by killing Tvashta, I have reaped the sin by  killing my brorther which is unthinkable, avoidable, undesirable and ignoble.
'Trees owned the sin of Indra and it was shared by the earth, water and women voluntarily.But who is there to pardon a monkey and own the sin?
'O Rama having acted in an unrighteous manner, which destroys the clan, I am not fit to accept the respect of people nor the status of a prince regent, what to speak of kingship?
'I have committed a sin which is condemned by the world. This intense grief has engulfed me just as the flow of rain water inundates the lowlying area when it rains.
'The elephant of sin (hanging heavily on me) has a tail of treacherous killing of one's own brother, which has resulted in deep sorrow in the form of a trunk, eyes, head and tusks.This elephant is striking at me as he would strike the bank of a river when he grows strong and gets puffed up with the pride of energy. (The idea of a proud elephant striking at the target is superimposed on the sin committed by Sugriva.The animal's tail is  the killing of a brother. Sugriva's remorse spreads all over the body trunk, eyes, head and tusks of the animal. As a proud elephant strikes at the river bank the sin is striking at Sugriva to destroy him. The Rupaka here is perfect and total).
'O distinguished Rama this anxiety is unbearable for me. My good behaviour is relegated to the back of my heart unable to bear the sin, just like the dirt surfaces pushing the bright colour of gold when burnt in fire.
'O Rama this race of mighty monkey chiefs is as though reduced to a halfdead state because of my action and the grief of Angada.
'One can find easily a son who is controllable and accessible in need but it is difficult to find a good son like Angada, who is virtuous and mighty and who is respectful to parents. O warrior (Rama), there is no place where I can get a brother like Vali. (A brother cannot be made. His relationship is natural. Rama stresses the same subhashita in Yuddhakanda when Lakshmana swooned).
'I am a sinner. I desire to enter the blazing fire (for atonement) in order to maintain friendship with my brother and son. At your command these vanara leaders will go round and search for Sita.
'O prince Rama even if I am dead the entire task of yours, will be accomplished by the  vanara race. I have ruined the whole race. I am sinful and not fit to live. Permit me (to enter fire).
Rama, the hero of the Raghu dynasty, a destroyer of the enemy heroes, was moved to tears. He lost composure for a moment when he heard Sugriva's lament.
In that moment, Rama,the protector of the world, tolerant like the earth, beheld Tara plunged in grief, looking at him again and again and weeping.
The foremost ministers of Vali lifted up the beautifuleyed, noble Tara, wife of the monkey hero clinging to the body of her husband, a lion among monkeys.
While Tara was clinging to her husband and struggling, and was being removed from there, she saw effulgent Rama holding bow and arrows glittering like the Sun.
The fawneyed Tara saw the magnificent man of Kakutstha family endowed with all royal marks and beautiful eyes, whom she had never seen before and knew he was Rama.
The noble Tara, desperate, agonised, totally shaken up quickly went near the magnanimous Rama,  who was like Indraunapproachable.
Wise Tara, baffled out of grief and agitated, with pure consciousness, approached Rama,  eminent in warfare who could hit the target. And spoke:
'You are immeasurable, unassailable, self controlled, and best among the righteous. Your fame never diminishes. You have great sense of discrimination. You are known to possess forbearance like the mother earth. Your eyes are redcornered (which is a sign of valour).
'You are wielding bow and arrows. You possess mighty human limbs that have the power to destroy the enemy .You  have assumed a divine human body.
'O warrior kill me by the same single arrow with which you killed my beloved lord,Vali. I will join him after death as he will not be happy without me.
'If Vali with eyes of clear petals of a lotus does not see me in heaven, he may not join the wonderfully dressed apsarasas adorned with different kinds of red flowers in their hair.
'O Rama Vali will experience sorrow and become pale bereft of me even in heaven just as you are filled with sorrow even on a delightful mountain slope bereft of princess of Videha.
'You are aware of the grief of a young man separated from his wife. Kill me so that I can go to Vali. Let not Vali experience the sorrow of not seeing me.
'O prince as you are great, you might think of the blemish of killing a woman. Since Tara is Vali's soul, you may kill me. It will not amount to killing a woman.(You will only be killing the soul of Vali by killing Tara).
'The  sacred texts as well as Vedic statements declare that wife is an inseparable part of the  husband's soul. To the learned, there is no greater offering in the world than restoring the wife to her husband. You will not beget any sin by killing me.
'O gallant prince  if you give me away to my dear lord, carefully considering dharma, you will not be committing any adharma by killing me since it will be an offering.
'O king it is proper on your part to kill me as I am in great distress. I am a helpless orphan torn away from her husband.O king I will not live long without the wise leader of monkeys who walked majestically like an elephant and wore the choicest golden necklace'. Implored by Tara this way, the great soul, Rama, lord of the earth said to Tara these words of consolation:
'O wife of a valiant warrior Do not lose heart. The entire world is controlled by the creator. People maintain that joy and sorrow are foreordained.
Consoled by the influential Rama, scorcher of enemies, Tara the charming wife of a warrior, stopped wailing aloud.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुर्विंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyfourth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Rama and Lakshmana were equally sad. Rama, scion of the Kakutstha race, consoled Sugriva, Tara as well as Angada in the following words:
'No lamentation revives the dead. So you should take up whatever is required now.
'You have to go the worldly way. You have shed tears enough. Time is passing. You cannot perform the funeral after the lapse of appropriate time.
'Fate is the cause of the world. Fate is the means of accomplishment. Fate assigns duties to all beings.
'No one can control another's action. No one including God can be the agent of action. No one has the power to entrust duty to others. This entire world is governed by one's own nature. Nature in turn is governed by Time (fate).
'God (though independent) does not deviate from Time. Time cannot be escaped or trangressed. It cannot be condoned or avoided. No one can transgress their own nature.
'Time has no consideration for relationship, friendship, or kinship or valour. Time itself is the cause. It is never under one's control.
'However a wise man should visualise the turn of events in course of time with the right vision. Dharma, artha and kama are controlled by an order laid down by Time.
'Vali, king of monkeys is dead and gone. He acted according to his own nature and attained the sacred fruit of his action comensurate with dharma, wealth and pleasures in this world.
'Great Vali has earned a place in heaven by virtue of his own dharma and not caring for his own life .He has got the heavenly position he earned.
'The state attained by the chief of monkeys is an excellent one.Therefore there is no need to regret. Attend to your duties (relating to rites)'
Seeing Sugriva had lost his senses, Lakshmana, the slayer of enemy warriors humbly said at the end of Rama's address:
'O Sugriva perform with Tara and Angada the funeral obsequies relating to the cremation of Vali.
'Let the best of dry logs and sandalwood be ordered for the funeral rites of Vali.
'Pacify the despondent Angada so that he does not entertain childish thoughts any more. This city is under your control (now).
'Let Angada for his part collect garlands of many kinds, clothes, clarified butter, oil, fragrants and all that is required to be procured.
'O Tara quickly get a swiftmoving litter fastened with ropes specially  suitable for this occasion.
'Let those who are strong and capable among the monkeys be ready to carry  the dead body of Vali on a litter'.
Having thus spoken to Sugriva, Lakshmana, son of Sumitra, slayer of enemies, stood by his brother
On hearing Lakshmana, Tara in an excited state quickly entered the cave city to get the litter.
Tara jumped in on to the litter carried by strong monkeys.
A swiftmoving, marvellous palanquin designed by Viswakarma was brought. Covered with colourful pictures of birds and trees on every side it looking like an aerial chariot fit for saints. Fitted with a splendid seat grilled windows, artificially made small caverns and grottos of wood was embellished with carvings of mountains, choice ornaments and garlands. With red sandal paste, red scented flowers and red lotus garlands, it resembled the rising Sun.
Seeing the palanquin, Rama said to Lakshmana 'Let the body of Vali be placed in the palanquin quickly and last rites duly performed'.
Then Sugriva along with Angada, crying aloud bitterly, lifted the body (of Vali) and placed it on the palanquin.
Vali's deadbody was placed on the palanquin, decorated with many ornaments, garlands and clothes
King Sugriva, lord of the monkeys, said, 'Let the funeral rites of my noble sire be performed in a fitting manner'.
'Let the monkeys march in front, showering many different gems in large quantities and let the palanquin follow.
'Let the monkeys perform the funeral rites of our lord in an honourable way as expensively as has been done with regard to the obsequies of kings who ruled over this land.
Tara, Angada and the other bereaved monkeys hastened to perform the funeral ceremony of Valiweeping.
Then all the female monkeys who were in his (Vali's) harem walked past the deadbody of Vali, crying again and again 'Alas, Oh hero'
Tara along with other female monkeys followed their lord, crying pathetically.
When the female monkeys were weeping in the midst of the forest, it looked as if the forest and the hills were also mourning.
Tormented with tears, the monkeys prepared in a solitary place surrounded by waters a pyre on the sandbank of a mountain stream.
Putting down the palanquin from their shoulders on the lonely spot, the bearers stood in tearswaiting.
Seeing her husband lying in the palanquin, Tara, full of grief placed Vali's head on her lap and cried.
'Why don't you look at me, oppressed with tears, O monkey king, O my venerable lord, O longarmed one, O my dear?
'O revered self even though you are bereft of life, your face looks cheerful. It carries the colour of the setting Sun, and looks the same when you were alive.
'O monkey a single arrow from Rama who appeared in the forest in the form of death dragged you away from us and turned us all into widows.
'O king of kings why don't you understand that these female monkeys, your wives who were dear to you have come on foot this long distance with great difficulty?
'O lord of monkeys these moonfaced wives were indeed once your favourites. Why don't you look  at them? Why don't you look Sugriva?
'O king O sinless hero Tara and others, your ministers as well as the inhabitants of the capital are here sitting around you.
'O conqueror of enemies give these monkeys their due in accordance with their status and send them back as you used to do when they were passionately sporting in your company here in this forest.
The griefstricken female monkeys helped Tara, overwhelmed with sorrow due to her husband's death, rise from the ground.
Then Angada, helped by Sugriva, placed his father's body on the pyre, with his senses numbed in deep sorrow.
Overwhelmed with sorrow, he offered fire to the father who had set out on a long journey (to heaven). As per tradition he went round the pyre anteclock wise.
The monkeys set Vali's body to be consumed by fire as per tradition and proceeded to an auspicious river of pure water in order to offer oblation (to the departed soul).
Then the monkeys along with Sugriva and Tara positioning Angada in the forefront made waterofferings (to Vali) collectively.
Mighty Rama, who was equally sorrowful and pitiable as Sugriva, directed the performance of funeral rites.
Then the chiefs of the army of the monkeys surrounded  Sugriva, who was overcome with grief and was still in wet clothes (since he had taken bath at the conclusion of the funeral rites) and waited.
Just like sages stand before the creator Brahma, all the monkeys stood with folded hands before the longarmed Rama, the remover of sorrow.
Hanuman, son of the Windgod, glowing like a golden mountain, whose face resembled the rising Sun addressed Rama with folded hands:
'O Lord by your grace Sugriva inherited the ancestral kingdom which would have been otherwise difficult.
'Permitted by your gracious self, he will enter the auspicious city along with his friends and perform his duties. He had his auspicious bath in fragrant waters with medicinal herbs as per tradition.
'He wants to propitiate you first specially with garlands and  gems. Pray enter this beautiful mountain cave for the pleasure of the monkeys and establish relationship with king Sugriva.'
Requested by Hanuman who was skilful in conversation, wise Rama, slayer of enemies, replied:
'Dear Hanuman In obedience to my father's command I should not enter any village or city for fourteen years.
'Let Sugriva enter the beautiful prosperous cavern (Kishkinda) and be installed by you as king with due rituals.'
Having thus spoken to Hanuman, Rama who knew etiquette addressed mighty  Sugriva, endowed with wisdom:
'O hero consecrate Angada as heirapparent since he deserves it as the eldest son of your brother, a noble soul and equal to you in prowess.
'O noble Sugriva the four months from now will be rainy season. This is Sravana, the first month of the season in which rain is expected to start pouring.
'O goodnatured Sugriva this is not a suitable time for any endeavour. Go to the auspicious capital city of Kishkinda and I will reside on the mountain with Lakshmana.
'Dear Sugriva this cavern of the mountain is large and airy. It has abundant water resources with lotuses and lilies.
'Enter the city and get yourself installed and cheer your friends. Make all arrangement for killing Ravana when the month of Kartika begins as it is the proper time (for the purpose).
Thus permitted by Rama , Sugriva, lord of the monkeys entered the beautiful city of Kishkinda (once) ruled by Vali.
Thousands of monkeys entered the city of Kishkinda along with their king, and stood  in attendance everywhere.
Then all the subjects of the city collected together, prostrated to the chief of the monkey clan with their forehead touching the ground (as a mark of respect) and sat down.
Asking the monkeys to rise to their feet, the mighty and powerful Sugriva entered the inner chambers of his brother.
With Sugriva,the lord of the monkeys, returned to Kishkinda, his kith and kin  coronated him just as the gods consecrated the thousandeyed Indra.
The monkeys brought a white canopy decorated with gold and two chamaras with glorious golden staff. They also brought jewels, all kinds of medicinal herbs, sprouts, sap from trees, white flowers and white clothes, unguents, garlands of fragrant lotuses that grow on land and water, heavently sandal, fragrants of different kinds, goldcoloured paddy, honey of priyanga, curds, tiger skin and sandals made of boar skin. Then sixteen beautiful, cheerful females appeared with unguent, gorochana mixed with red arsenic (used for putting tilaka on the forehead).
Then they duly propitiated the brahmins, offering them gifts of gems, clothes and eatables.
Then the priests (people who recite Vedic hymns) strew around kusa grass, kindled sacred fire with recitation of mantras and made offerings of havis into the fire.
Then Sugriva was seated facing the east on a golden throne with fine coverings on top of the mansion decorated with multicoloured garlands. As per tradition, sacred waters  collected from rivers and rivulets and stored in golden pots was aportioned in accordance with the procedure ordained by the sages in sastras. At the appropriate time the pure and fragrant water was poured by Gaja, Gavaya, Sarabha, Mainda, Dvivida, Hanumanta, Jambavan and Nala on Sugriva, the bull among monkeys through horns of bulls and jars of gold, like the eight Vasus bathed the thousandeyed Indra. Thus they performed the consecration.
As Sugriva was ceremoniously consecrated, thousands of monkeys rejoiced and shrieked out of joy.
In obedience to Rama's instruction, Sugriva, lord of the monkeys installed Angada as prince regent and embraced him.
The great monkeys concerned hailed Sugriva's action  saying, 'well done, well done' on the installation of Angada.
As Sugriva and Angada were installed, all the monkeys were highly pleased and praised the noblehearted Rama and Lakshmana again and again.
The beautiful city of Kishkinda situated in a mountaincave, decorated with banners and flags was filled with happy, wellfed citizens.
After the consecration, Sugriva entered the cavecity (of Kishkinda) and Rama accompanied by his brother reached mountain Prasravana.
The (Prasravana) mountain reverberated with the terrific roars of tigers and deer and lions. There were several kinds of shrubs, creepers and trees.It was inhabited by bears, apes, monkeys and wild cats in large number. The mountain was like a huge cluster of clouds. The waters in the ponds were pure.
Rama and Lakshmana decided to reside in the long, wide cave on top of the great mountain.
Sinless Rama, the delight of the Raghus made an agreement with Sugriva and then spoke appropriately to Lakshmana, his obedient brother and enhancer of glory:
'O Saumitri, subduer of enemies this beautiful mountain cave is spacious and  adequately ventilated. We will reside here in the rainy season.
'O prince this lovely mountain peak is lofty. It has white, black and red stones with many kinds of minerals scattered all over. It is delightful with caves and streams, and various clusters of trees and variegated vines. The chirps of several kinds of birds as well as the sounds of excellent peacocks are heard here. This place is delightful with bushes of jasmine, kunda and sindhuvara, sireeshaka, kadamba, arjuna and sarja in bloom.
'O prince this lovely mountain peak is lofty. It has white, black and red stones with many kinds of minerals scattered all over. It is delightful with caves and streams, and various clusters of trees and variegated vines. The chirps of several kinds of birds as well as the sounds of excellent peacocks are heard here. This place is delightful with bushes of jasmine, kunda and sindhuvara, sireeshaka, kadamba, arjuna and sarja in bloom.
'O prince this pond with lotus creeper and lotuses in full bloom is endearing. It is located not far from the cave.
'O goodnatured Lakshmana the descending path on the northeastern side of the cave and elevation on the the west is auspicious.This place is protected from rain water and  from strong wind.
'O Lakshmana at the entrance of the cave is a rock, smooth and large,  resembling a heap of shining collyrium.
'O dear look at the mountain peak in the north rising like a raincloud.It is auspicious.  It resembles a heap of collyrium.
'In the southern direction is a white rock appearing as if it is another mountain. It looks like mount Kailas and is rich with various minerals.
'Look at the river flowing towards the east. It has clean water and flows towards the east of the cave and looks like the river Jahnavi flowing on the mount Trikuta. This place looks delightful with the sandalwood, tilaka, sala, tamala, atimukta, padmaka, sarala and asoka trees.
'See the different kinds of trees like canes timida, vakula, ketaka, hintala, tinisa, kadamba, dhava, krutamalaka, betasa grown here and there  on the bank (of the river), which  looks beautiful like a woman decorated with clothes and ornaments.
'The river flocked with hundreds of birds chirping melodious notes and specially the chakravaka birds which are clinging to their mates in great love are moving in pairs.The river has lovely sandy banks filled with swans and sarasa birds. The river appears as though a young woman decked all over is laughing.
'The river looks wonderful with lotuses now blue, now red and now white.
'This placid river water is haunted by waterbirds, peacocks and kraunchas, It is inhabited by groups of sages.
'See the uniform rows of sandalwood trees, it looks as though they are arranged together imaginatively.
'O Saumitri destroyer of enemies this place is most enchanting. Surely we will reside here sporting in joy .
'O prince  Sugriva's delightful city of Kishkinda with wonderful forest around is not  far from here.
'O hero among the victorious, the sounds of vocal and instrumental music, the beating of drums and shrieking of monkeys are heard (from here).
'Having obtained his wife, his kingdom and attained prosperity the monkey chief,                                 Sugriva will be surely enjoying the company of friends and relatives'.
Having said so, Rama resided with Lakshmana on the Prasvarana mountain with many beautiful caverns and shrubs of vines.
Though Rama was residing in comfort on the mountain richly endowed with many pleasant things, he experienced little happiness.
Specially with the rising Moon in the east, he remembered his abuducted wife who was dearer to him than his life.
As Rama lay in bed, at night, his grief rose and choked him with tears.
Seeing Rama worried and engrossed in endless sorrow, his brother Lakshmana who was equally sad spoke these words of consolation:
'O heroic one, you know one who broods fails to achieve his objective. So do not brood.
'O Rama you are a man of action, enterprising. You are godfearing, righteous and religious. You will not be able to kill a crooked enemy in a battle, especially a demon, with your valour if you make no endeavour.
'Root out sorrow. Be daring. Be firm in resolve. (Only) then can you destroy the demon and his family.
'O Kakutstha, you can turn the earth with its oceans, forests and mountains, what to speak of Ravana.
'This is the rainy season.Wait for autumn.Thereafter you will destroy Ravana along with his kingdom and clan.
'I am only awakening your dormant valour as one would kindle the fire covered with ashes by making offerings.'
On hearing the good counsel and auspicious words of Lakshmana, Rama spoke these loving and warm words:
'O Lakshmana you have spoken the words of an affectionate and friendly counsellor of proven valour.
'This sorrow which dampens one's daring spirit is given up. I shall now resort to such  undaunted valour during my heroic exploits.
'I will wait for autumn. I will stick to your advice while I wait until Sugriva and the rivers are pleased (with moderate flow of water.)
Then Lakshmana reflected upon the words of Rama thoughtfully. He honoured his brother's words by receiving his advice with folded hands and spoke to his handsome brother giving out his own views:
'O lord of men, your desire will be fulfilled soon. Be determined to fight the enemy while waiting for autumn. Forgive this rainy season (and its water that obstructs).
'Control your anger and wait for autumn. Pardon these (intervening) four months (which put a halt on your wareffort). Stay with me on this mountain infested with lions. Brace up to kill the enemy.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyseventh sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.
After the killing of Vali and installation of Sugriva as king, Rama arrived at mountain Malyavan to reside.He said to Lakshmana:
'Now that the rainy season has started, see the sky covered with mountainlike (huge) clouds.
'The sky has drained the water from the oceans through the Sun's rays and has borne it for nine months (from Kartika to Asarha) in its womb. It delivers water which is the base for all juices.
'It is possible to climb up to the sky on the stairs formed by the clouds and decorate the Sungod with garlands made of kutaja and arjuna flowers.
'The sky looks as though its wounds are dressed with pale white moistureladen bandage cloths of clouds, red in the border, tinged as they are with the glow of twilight.
'The sky with its gentle winds as its sighs, its ash coloured clouds (suggestive of a pale face) painted with red sandalpaste in the form of glow of twilight appears like a passionate lover.
'This earth scorched by the heat and then flooded with fresh rain water, radiating heat, appears like my Sita shedding tears burning with grief.
'The winds released from the wombs of clouds, cool as the delicate touch of white lotuses,charged with the fragrance of ketaka flowers can be inhaled through the hollow of one's palms.
'This mountain scented by the fragrance of arjuna and ketaka flowers is bathed in rain water just as Sugriva, tranquilled by the destruction of the enemy is consecrated in streams of (sacred) waters.
'The mountains are covered with dark clouds which appear like the hide of the antelope. Streams of rain water flowing are like the sacred threads hanging down the shoulder and the sounds of wind filling the caves resemble the recitation of Vedas by priests. (These mountains are comparable to the brahmacharins engaged in the recitation of Vedas wearing antelopeskin and sacred threads).
'The sky lashed with lightnings with whips of gold and emitting groans in the form of peals of thunder, appears as though crying in severe pain.
'The triggering of lightning in the dark clouds appears to me like austere Vaidehi struggling helplessly to get free from the lap of Ravana.
'Smeared as it were with dense clouds and therefore blocked the directions in which planets including the Moon cease to appear are favourable to lovers. The Moon is said to accenuate the pangs of separation from one's ladylove. Hence the quarters in which the Moon and the stars are hidden by clouds, have been favourable to the lovelorn.
'O Saumitri look at the kutaja flowers standing on the mountain slopes withered by the heat. They welcome the fresh showers of rain and rekindle passion in me even though my heart is overwhelmed with grief.
'Now the dust has settled and the wind carrying mist is cool. The torments of summer have ceased. The expeditions of kings have come to a stop and the travellers return to their native land.
'Desirous of living in Manasa lake swans have set out on their journey and the chakravaka birds are now united with their mates. The carts move not on the roads damaged by heavy rains.
'The sky which is visible here is not visible there due to clouds scattered. It looks bright (blue) here and dull there. It appears like an unruffled ocean interspersed with hills here and there.
'The mountainstreams of rainwater mingled with sarja and kadamba flowers carry fresh water swiftly to the ocean along with the deposits of red mineral rocks of the mountain. Hark, the peacock cries.
'The black bees like jambu fruits full of sweet juice. People share them to their hearts  content, while the mango fruits which take multiple colours on getting ripened drop on the ground shaken by the wind.
The clouds that resemble high mountain peaks, having their banners of lightning with rows of herons as garlands give out loud peals of thunder like elephants in rut trumpet in battlearray.
'The tender green grass of the forest is shining with rainwater, the peacocks are having dance festival and the forests look more enchanting  in the afternoon.
'The huge rumbling clouds on the high mountain peaks carry heavy load of water. Now they rest and now resume their journey accompanied by herons.
'The happy rows of herons flying in the sky to meet the clouds, appear like a long garland of choice white lotuses strung together hanging in the sky.
'The earth shines with freshgrown, tender grass speckled here and there with small Indragopa insects. It appears like a woman wearing a parrotgreen veil sprinkled with red lac dye.
'Sleep steals over Lord Visnu. The rivers run swiftly to the sea, the female herons fly to catch the clouds joyfully. The young bride eagerly approaches her dear lord. (It is believed that Lord Visnu goes to sleep during chaturmasya, ie. from Asarh to Kartik)
'Peacocks dance in the forest. The branches of the kadamba trees get filled with flowers. Bulls long for union with the cows. The earth looks beautiful with green crops and trees.
'The clouds are raining. The rivers are flowing. Proud elephants are trumpeting. Those separated from their loved ones are brooding. The monkeys are quiet and the peacocks are dancing.
'The lordly elephants get intoxicated with the fragrance of ketaki flowers, the noise of waterfalls and the cackle of peacocks and they give out a shrill trumpet.
'Having sucked honey from the flowercups filled with honey, the bees are shedding their drunkenness slowly and hanging on the branches of kadamba trees, smitten with showers.
'The branches of jambu trees profusely  filled with fruits appear like piled up balls of charcoal, while swarms of bees rest on the branches on the jambu trees.
'The rainclouds decorated with banners of lightning and giving out peals of thunder shine like elephants in rut trumpeting, eager to fight in battle.
'Intoxicated elephants on their march along the mountain in the forest, hear the thundering sounds of clouds and suspecting it to be the call of proud elephants to fight turn back.
'Swarms of bees hum here. Peacocks dance there. Intoxicated elephants sport in water in other places. (Thus)  the forest shows its many features.
'The forest region with its various types of trees like kadamba, sarja and arjuna trees and full of fresh water shines like a tavern where girls in the form of peahens dance in excitement.
'Thirsty birds rejoice drinking exceedingly pure water held in leafcups offered by Indra (in the form of rain), which looks like pearls collected in the leafcups. As the drops fall on them the hue of their wings seems to change (fade).
'The sweet humming of bees like the music of string instruments (Vina), the croaking of frogs, the rumbling of clouds sounding like the beating of drums make it appear as if a musical concert has started in the forest.
'Here the peacocks are dancing and there they are singing. Elsewhere they are reclining on treetops with their big plumage hanging down. It appears as though the peacocks have started a musical concert in the forest.
'Frogs of different forms, colours and sounds are croaking, awakened from their long sleep by the thunders of clouds and flow of fresh rainwater.
'Washing away their broken banks which obstruct their way to the sea, the bloated rivers like proud young ladies with chakravaka birds borne on their surface ,which look like protruberant breasts, rush swiftly to meet their lord, the sea, chosen for full enjoyment with the gifts of flowers.
'Dark clouds filled with fresh water, leaning on dark clouds appear like boulders of rock, scorched with wild fire with their bases yet firmly rooted shining.
'Elephants roam the forestland inhabited by peacocks making noise out of joy, where the grassy land is filled with crawling Indragopa insects and the fragrance of kadamba and arjuna blossoms.
'The bees have quit the lotus filaments destroyed by the rain and happily move quickly towards fresh filaments of kadamba flowers.
'Intoxicated elephants roam the forest. Mighty bulls rejoice. Kings of beasts (lions) lounge. Mountains look beautiful. Kings relax. While Indra, lord of the gods, sports with clouds.
'With their big torrents, clouds hanging over the sky, drowning the roar of the sea, make the rivers, ponds, lakes and tanks overflow and flood the entire earth.
'Torrents of rain pour at great speed. Winds roar. Rivers flow swiftly changing their direction due to breach in the banks
'The mountains are consecrated with waterpitchers of clouds brought by the winds, offered by Lord Indra. Just as kings, consecrated by men, display their majesty, the mountains exhibit their form and glory. (Clouds are compared with water pots)
'Ennveloped by clouds, the Sun and stars are not visible. The earth glides with the flow of fresh waters. The directions are not clear, covered by darkness.
'The huge mountain peaks are washed by the heavy downpour of rain which look like long strings of pearls hanging.
'The waterfalls rushing down the rocks on the huge mountains and flowing through caves, and peacocks singing create an image of broken and scattered chains of pearls.
'The fast flow of waterfalls spread over vast areas completely wash the surroundings  of the mountain peaks. It appears like chains of pearls collected in the lap of huge caves.
'The strings of incomparable waterfalls all over the mountain appear as though pearls from the chains of sexually indulgent celestial women are dropping down from heaven, broken through physical friction.
'The time of the setting Sun (as he remains invisible the whole day) is known  only by the birds reaching out to their dwellings for rest, and by the closing of lotuses and blossoming jasmines.
'Expeditions by kings come to a stop. The army returns. The flow of water blocks the roads. It suspends enmity (between states).
'The month of Bhadrapada meant for the recitation of the Vedas by brahmins and for those desirous of singing  Sama Veda has started.
'Surely Bharata, king of Kosala, would have completed the collection of all his requirement before the commencement of the month of Asarh.
'Just as the cheerful voices of people of Ayodhya rise as soon as they see me returning, certainly the speed of river Sarayu is rising, filled with rain water.
'Having defeated his enemy, Sugriva with his wife during the rainy season is wellestablished in the kingdom,  abounding in merits.
'O Lakshmana I have lost my wife. I have been dethroned from the mighty kingdom. I am sinking like a river bank overflowed.
'My sorrow which increases, the rains which make it hard to cover distances and Ravana the great enemyall these appear difficult to conquer.
'Since Sugriva has gone through great difficulties and is reunited with his wives after a long time and since our task is great, I did not desire to speak to him now.
'O Lakshmana of auspicious qualities I will wait for the proper time to appease Sugriva as well as the rivers.
A hero should in return help whoever has helped him. An ungrateful person hurts the heart of the virtuous by not returning the assistance.'
Having heard this, Lakshmana expressed his considered opinion with due respect to handsome Rama:
'O Rama come Autumn, Sugriva will soon do all that you desire. Bear with the rains. Stay steadfast (in your determination) to destroy the enemy.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किंधाकाण्डे अष्टाविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyeighth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.
Hanuman, son of the Windgod, saw the clear sky flooded with lovely moonlight, free from clouds and lightning and cackling of herons. He noticed that because Sugriva had attained abundant wealth and merit, he was not taking care of the kingdom. He was engrossed in sensual pleasures. Having accomplished the desired object, he was engaged in enjoyment of the company of women, his own wives and Tara, whom he coveted. He was strolling (in the pleasant garden) night and day without caring for the kingdom, entrusting it to the ministers whose movements he did not watch. He was sporting with women like Indra sports with apsaras in the Nandana garden.Hanuman, who was conscious of his duties and responsibilities, who was aware of the importance of action in time and who was skilful in speech approached Sugriva, king of the monkeys. Having decided to take him into confidence, Hanuman spoke in a convincing, wellmeaning, sweet, pleasing manner words truthful and helpful, conciliatory and just, full of love and affection:
Hanuman, son of the Windgod, saw the clear sky flooded with lovely moonlight, free from clouds and lightning and cackling of herons. He noticed that because Sugriva had attained abundant wealth and merit, he was not taking care of the kingdom. He was engrossed in sensual pleasures. Having accomplished the desired object, he was engaged in enjoyment of the company of women, his own wives and Tara, whom he coveted. He was strolling (in the pleasant garden) night and day without caring for the kingdom, entrusting it to the ministers whose movements he did not watch. He was sporting with women like Indra sports with apsaras in the Nandana garden.Hanuman, who was conscious of his duties and responsibilities, who was aware of the importance of action in time and who was skilful in speech approached Sugriva, king of the monkeys. Having decided to take him into confidence, Hanuman spoke in a convincing, wellmeaning, sweet, pleasing manner words truthful and helpful, conciliatory and just, full of love and affection:
Hanuman, son of the Windgod, saw the clear sky flooded with lovely moonlight, free from clouds and lightning and cackling of herons. He noticed that because Sugriva had attained abundant wealth and merit, he was not taking care of the kingdom. He was engrossed in sensual pleasures. Having accomplished the desired object, he was engaged in enjoyment of the company of women, his own wives and Tara, whom he coveted. He was strolling (in the pleasant garden) night and day without caring for the kingdom, entrusting it to the ministers whose movements he did not watch. He was sporting with women like Indra sports with apsaras in the Nandana garden.Hanuman, who was conscious of his duties and responsibilities, who was aware of the importance of action in time and who was skilful in speech approached Sugriva, king of the monkeys. Having decided to take him into confidence, Hanuman spoke in a convincing, wellmeaning, sweet, pleasing manner words truthful and helpful, conciliatory and just, full of love and affection:
Hanuman, son of the Windgod, saw the clear sky flooded with lovely moonlight, free from clouds and lightning and cackling of herons. He noticed that because Sugriva had attained abundant wealth and merit, he was not taking care of the kingdom. He was engrossed in sensual pleasures. Having accomplished the desired object, he was engaged in enjoyment of the company of women, his own wives and Tara, whom he coveted. He was strolling (in the pleasant garden) night and day without caring for the kingdom, entrusting it to the ministers whose movements he did not watch. He was sporting with women like Indra sports with apsaras in the Nandana garden.Hanuman, who was conscious of his duties and responsibilities, who was aware of the importance of action in time and who was skilful in speech approached Sugriva, king of the monkeys. Having decided to take him into confidence, Hanuman spoke in a convincing, wellmeaning, sweet, pleasing manner words truthful and helpful, conciliatory and just, full of love and affection:
'You have attained the kingdom. You have earned fame. The prosperity of your family has gone up. All that remains is to earn the goodwill of friends. Attend to that  now.
'The kingdom, glory and fame of a king who knows the value of time and conducts himself well towards his allies always grows.
'He to whom the treasury, sceptre, allies and his own self all these are equally dear,  enjoys a large kingdom.
'Endowed with right conduct, you ought to duly answer the cause of your ally conforming to proper course of action.
'Whoever sets aside his personal interest and works for the welfare of his ally with due enthusiasm and excitement  will not be harmed.
'He who exceeds the time limit in accomplishing a friend's task, and puts forth great effort later succeeds not.
'O subduer of enemies we should do the brave deed of finding Vaidehi for the sake of your friend. O crusher of enemies this is your duty at present and it is already delayed.
'O king a wise man (like Rama) who is aware of timely action would not tell you even if it is unduly delayed, even when he is in a hurry to get the work done, since he is staying in your kingdom (since he is dependant on you).
'Rama is  responsible in lending stability to you and to your wellknown family. He will continue to be your ally for a long time. Let it be known that his power is boundless and his virtues peerless.
'O king pray accomplish his object the same way he has accomplished your own. You ought to issue orders to the foremost of the monkeys.
'Time will not be deemed lapsed in vain if the work is sincerely taken up without delay and without pressure from your ally, Rama. If it is undertaken under pressure, it will be considered transgression of time.
'O lord of monkeys help even a person who has not helped you. As such, do you need to be told that you should help one, with whose help you have earned wealth and kingdom?
'O protector of the monkeys, you are powerful and you are prompt. Why don't you issue orders which will please Rama?
'Indeed, Rama is fully capable of subduing gods, demons as well as nagas with his arrows. He is looking for your help in view of your promise.
'He has done you a deed dear to you without hesitation, risking his own life.Let us help him in search of his Vaidehi whether she is on earth or in heaven.
'Not gods, demons, gandharvas or even marutas, suras or yakshas can cause fright in him much less the rakshasas.
'Therefore, O king of monkeys you ought to oblige Rama wholeheartedly exerting all your strength, as he has done your work.
'O lord of monkeys commanded by you, each one of us or all of us together can ransack the underworld, the earth, or water or heaven.
O sinless hero therefore issue your command. There are more than a crore of invincible monkeys. Determine  now who should  do and what and in which place. We are at your service'.
Sugriva who had a great sense of duty, started applying  his mind, when he heard the honest advice of Hanuman.
He sent word to the ever diligent Nila, his favourite, to collect all cadres of army of the monkeys from all directions.
'Let the entire army with leaders of different groups assemble here seperately. O chief of army act accordingly.
'Let the swiftfooted monkeys, guardians of frontiers, army chiefs muster soon in obedience to my command. You (Nila) alone should personally  supervise the work to be done next.
'In strict obedience to my orders, go with Angada to the elderly monkeys and inform them about my decision and order'. After making this arrangement valiant Sugriva entered his residence.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyninth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.
While Sugriva was in his residence, Rama was (in Prasravana mountain) spending his rainy nights tormented by passion (for Sita). Sugriva was engaged in love, forgetting the time fixed for taking up the search for Sita. When the sky became clear of clouds after the rainy season, Rama sat gazing at the clear autumnal Moon's orb. He was besmeared with moonlight and felt perturbed as time was running out. And then fell into a swoon. (only a few months remained for the completion of the exile and Bharata will put an end to himself if Rama does not return to Ayodhya on the stipulated day. This worried Rama.)
Gaining back the senses after a while, wise Rama started thinking about Vaidehi, who remained in his heart.
Sitting on top of the mountain shining with gold and minerals, Rama  gazed at the pleasant autumnal sky and started thinking of his beloved.
Looking at the sky rid of clouds and lightning, filled with the sounds of flocks of sarasa birds, Rama cried in a pitiable state.
'How will the young lady (Sita) whose voice is like the sarasa bird's, who was revelling, listening to its sweet cackle at the hermitage be living now?
'How will my beloved wife feel on seeing the asana flowers which are as pure as gold, when she does not find me anywhere?
'How will my Sita with her charming limbs and sweet words, who used to get up from sleep by the cackle of swans, wake up now?
'How will that  lady with large, pale white eyes sustain her life now, since she is used to listening to the sweet notes of chakravaka birds, who were her companions?
'Even though I am wandering by lakes, rivers, wells, forests and groves,I am not happy without that fawneyed lady.
'I think even the charm of autumn must be always tormenting that lovely lady, as she is very far from me. She is too delicate to suffer the agony of separation.'
Thus the best among the princes wailed just as chakrabaka laments for water from Indra, lord of the gods.
Graceful Lakshmana returned after going round and round the beautiful mountain slopes for fruits and saw his brother.
Observing Rama who had lost his senses, lying alone in unbearable agony, venerable Lakshmana became sad and miserable and spoke to his brother:
'O revered brother why do you succumb to passion and loss of selfconfidence? Why is the usual composure of your mind withdrawn? Why do you desist from yaga?
'You are an undaunted warrior. Take to the path of action. Resort to samadhiyoga or meditation and regain the serenity of mind. Make the strength of your effort the source of your success.
'O lord of the human race O worthy hero when you are the protector, Janaki cannot be retained by any one easily just as burning fire after it reaches its full height cannot be retained by any one.'
Rama said to Lakshmana, an unassailable warrior with auspicious signs, that what he had spoken was natural, beneficial, wise and useful.It is in accordance with Sama Veda and the science of statecraft, well established in dharma and artha.
'My dear, there is no doubt that I have to consider the work (ahead), give special attention to follow up. Surely I need to think over this herculian task and its achievement'.
Then falling back on the memory of Maithili, the lady with eyes like lotus petals, he said to Lakshmana with parched lips:
'Having satisfied the earth with abundant rain water and having fulfilled the task of ripening the crops, the thousandeyed Indra has done his duty, has settled down now.
'O prince having discharged their water the clouds (after the rains) are exhausted. They are moving now over trees and mountains, making deep and pleasant sounds.
'The clouds, which were dark till now like the blue lotus petals darkening all the ten directions  are like elephants free from all intoxication as their fury is abated৷৷
'O dear the moist winds have ceased to blow as before and are carrying the fragrance of kutaja and arjuna flowers.
'O sinless Lakshmana the rumblings of heavy clouds, the trumpeting of elephants, the cry of peacocks and the sound of waterfalls have become suddenly stilled.
'The mountain slopes, having  been washed by the showers of rain on all sides, are cleansed. They are shining in variegated colours and look as though the mountain peaks are smeared with glowing colours (of minerals).
'The autumn has set in, manifesting its grace on the branches of saptachada trees(sevenleafed banana plant) through the radiance of stars, Sun and Moon and through the sports of excellent elephants.
'From the beauty of autumn manifested in a variety of ways on the clusters of lotuses, touched by the Sun, it seems the goddess of wealth shines and shines effulgently. (The lotus is goddess Laxmi's favourite flower)
'The wind carries the fragrance of saptachada flowers. Attracted by the fragrance, swarms of bees come humming. The pride of the elephants in rut increases.
'The swans have come face to face with chakravaka birds. They have newly arrived.  Lovers of lakes, they are shaking the pollen of lotuses on their lovely wide wings and have settled on the sandy bankssporting.
'Goddess Laxmi with her scattered self shines there among the proud elephants, among herds of excited bulls and among streams with clear water.
'The sky is free from clouds. The peacocks have shed their ornamental plumes. They have lost interest in their beloveds. With their glory withdrawn, the peacocks are devoid of happiness and absorbed in the thought of the clouds.
'The forests are delightful to the eyes, as if illuminated by a large number of goldencoloured, finesmelling priyaka branches bent under the heavy loads of flowers.
'Lordly elephants accompanied by their dear female mates, fond of lotus ponds  and woods are out to enjoy the sweet smell of the blossoms of saptachada  and excited by passion and longing for sexual union are moving slowly.
'Cleared of the black clouds, the sky is shining like a polished weapon. The river waters flow feebly. Winds blowing over white lotuses feel cool. All quarters clear of darkness are shining.
'The bulls surrounded by cows are bellowing with the dust settled on their limbs. Excited by passion they are happy, ready to fight. They look attractive, blessed by the attributes of Autumn.
'The female elephants of good breed, deeply passionate, gather round and follow their intoxicated lord moving slowly through the forest.
'The peacocks have shed their ornamental wear, their plumes. They are moving on the river banks miserably, devoid of high spirit as if they are being taunted by flocks of sarasa birds (who are highspinted and cheerful).
'Excellent elephants in rut, with ichor exuding from their temples trumpet, frightening the ducks and chakravaka birds in the water. Strirring the water in the lakes, ornamented with lotuses, they drink it.
'The swans are full of joy, flocking on the sand banks of rivers crowded with cows where the water is pure and devoid of mud. The rivers are full of sarasa birds and swans who are singing delightfully.
'Suddenly the turbulent sounds of the river waters, waterfalls and thunderclouds have stopped. The peacoks having lost the pleasure of blowing winds lost their excitement. The croaking of frogs is silent.
'With no new rainclouds (in the sky), venomous, multicoloured serpents crawl out of the anthills with emacited (hybernated) bodies, troubled by hunger due to long confinement.
'While the stars appear with the soothing touch of the Moon's beams, this ruddy twilight is quitting the sky on her own.
'The night appears like a lady with a sweet face lit up by the rising Moon, her beautiful eyes opened up by stars, her body draped in the robe of white Moon light.
'Driven by the wind, the lovely sarasa birds, after eating ripened grains from paddy fields happily fly the sky in rows like a garland at great speed.
'With a single swan in sleep night lotuses blooming around it, the water in the big tank appear like the sky free from clouds with the full Moon and clusters of stars scattered. (The swan is the moon, the lotuses the stars and the clean pond the sky).
'Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth (also of autumn) appears decorated with deep wells like an excellent lady with swans as girdles and blooming lotuses and lilies as  garlands.
'The whistling of bamboos enhanced by the wind in the early morning, and the bellowing of bulls echoing in the caves supplement each other as it were.
'The river banks shining with fresh white flowers of kasa reeds swayed by the gentle breeze silken look like a lady wrapped in white silk.
'The butterflies glitter around in the forest fearlessly showing their skill in drinking honey, with their backs turned white with the dust of pollen grains from the lotus cups. They follow the wind along with their loved ones in the forest.
'The fresh blooms of night lotuses, the cackle of krauncha birds, fully ripened fields of paddy, the gentle breeze and the bright Moon indicate the coming to an end of the rainy season and setting in of autum.
'Now the riverbrides, displaying their girdles of fish, have  slowed down like the gait of sensuous ladies in the early morning, exhausted by sexual pleasures.
'Crowded with chakravaka birds and green moss, and covered with kasa reeds like silken veils, the river banks appear like the face of the bride decorated with designs of green leaves and gorochana tilaka.
'Now Cupid is moving unobstructed showing his power by holding his bow indicating strict punishment to those separated from their beloveds in the forests with bana and asana flowers in bloom and bees humming happily.
'Having showered heavy rains, and filling tanks and rivers, and producing bumper crops on the earth the clouds have disapeared.
'Just as bashful young brides show their loins slowly during their first sexual meet the rivers start showing their sandy banks slowly in autumn.
'O gentle Lakshmana the pure water in the tanks and sweet sounds of flocks of female kurari birds and chakravakas there are splendid.
'The asanas, saptaparna, kovida and bandhujeeva trees and shyama creepers are seen in full bloom on the mountain slopes.
'Lakshmana look at the swans, sarasas, chakravakas and kurara birds scattered all over the river banks.
'O handsome prince the time has come for making expeditions by kings against the enemies waiting for victory.
'O prince this is time for the first expedition (of the year) by kings. I do not find Sugriva making effort in that direction.
'O gentle one, the four months of rainy season are spent without seeing Sita. It is equal to a hundred years for my griefstricken heart.
'Just as a female chakravaka follows the male, Sita followed her husband into this dense Dandaka forest as though it is a pleasuregarden.
'O Lakshmana king Sugriva shows no mercy on one, who is griefstricken, separated from his wife, and banished from the kingdom.
'O gentle one although I am a vanquisher of foes, this evilminded king of monkeys is slighting me because I am away from home, I have lost my kingdom, I am outraged by Ravana, I am miserable and lovesick and I have sought his help.
'The evilminded Sugriva, having fulfilled his objective, does not realise that he has made a promise to me and has reached the time set for the search of Sita.
'Go to Kishkinda and speak (on my behalf ) to that  fool, Sugriva, the chief of monkeys who is revelling in habitual sensual pleasures
'He who, having promised to his friend to grant his desire and who, having been obliged, fails to implement the promise, is the lowest on earth.
'(On the other hand) he who honours his promise, whether good or bad, is truly heroic, the best of men.'
'Even the carnivorous animals dislike to eat the body of such ungrateful men who do not help their friends even though they have received help and have achieved their objective.'
'Surely he wishes to see the form of my bow inlaid with gold bent by me to its full length, looking like a streak of lightning.
'Perhaps he wants once again to hear when enraged in a combat, the dreadful twang of my bow, resembling the peal of a thunderbolt .
'O prince knowing my valour fully welI, and knowing that you are here to help me he is unhesitatingly revelling in sensual pleasures.
'O conqueror of the enemy capital the monkey lord who has achieved his goal does not realise the importance of my mission.
'Having promised (to search for Sita) after the rainy season,Sugriva is not aware that he has (already) spent the four monthsrevelling.
'Sporting with the council of ministers surrounding him, resorting to drinking, he shows no compassion to us feeling wretched with grief.
'O mighty warrior O dear, go to Sugriva and make him aware of the virulence of my anger and tell him:
'The route by which Vali departed, killed by me has not been closed. O Sugriva you ought to abide by the pledge given. Do not  follow the path of Vali.
'Vali was killed by me in the battle with a single arrow while I shall kill you now along with your near and dear ones since you have deviated from the truth.'
'O bull among men O hero speak to him that  all that is done in time is done well. Hurry up. Ask him to do whatever is good for him as well as for us:
'O lord of monkeys Carry out the promise you made to me, consider it to be eternal dharma. Slain by my arrows, you will see  Vali in the abode of the lord of death.'
On seeing Rama, the protector of the human race, wailing Lakshmana of terrific lustre  hardened his stand against Sugriva and proceeded, charged with intense anger.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रिंशस्सर्गःThus ends the thirtieth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.
Seeing the indomitable hero, his elder brother, son of a king, lovesick, dejected and overcome by anger and grief, spoke prince Lakshmana:
'Sugriva has not stuck to the conduct of the virtuous, of sharing the fruits of action equally. He does not realize that he obtained the prosperous kingship of vanaras as a result of your (friendly) action. He does not have the intelligence of conducting himself in your favour (of searching Sita). Therefore he will not enjoy the kingship for long.
'O hero he is too ungrateful to return the favour done to him, Engaged in rustic, vulgar pleasures, he is not thinking of it. Let him see his killed elder brother. Kingship should not be given to an individual who is a destitute of virtues.
'I cannot hold my overflowing anger. I shall kill this untruthful Sugriva. Let Vali's son along with the foremost of monkeys search for the queen (Sita).'
Rama, a slayer of enemy heroes but not of those who seek his refuge, spoke in a conciliatory tone to Lakshmana who jumped, wielding bow and arrows, inspired with his fierce fighting spirit.
'O Lakshmana with your good conduct you should not do so.  Keeping in view the affectionate friendship extended (by Sugriva) earlier, be friendly.
'Sugriva has exceeded the time limit. Avoiding harsh words, you ought to speak to him in a conciliatory manner.
Having been duly briefed by his elder brother, the heroic Lakshmana, destroyer of enemies, a bull among men entered the city.
The noblehearted, benevolent and wise Lakshmana, eager to please Rama, picked up his bow looking like a mountain peak, comparable to the bow of Indra and agitated with the anger of the god of Death entered the mansion of Sugriva which stood like the mountain peak of Mandara.
Then Lakshmana, obedient, intelligent like Brihaspati, like a tempest, encompassed by the fire of anger and deliberating in his mind as to the possible questions from Sugriva and the reply from him.
'Lakshmana rushed on foot speedily, cutting the branches of sala, tala and asvakarna and other trees on the way  and forcibly turning and crushing the mountain rocks into pieces with a single foot, like a swiftmoving elephant taking long strides, to carry out the task.
The tiger of the Ikshvaku race saw the inaccessible Kishkinda, the capital of vanara kingdom, located between mountains and fortified with the army.
His lips trembling in anger, Lakshmana saw fierceful monkey guards of Sugriva at the entrance of Kishkinda city.
Hundreds of monkeys of the size of elephants stood holding huge trees and boulders of rocks on seeing Lakshmana, the bull among men.
On seeing the monkeys wielding weapons, Lakshmana's anger doubled like logs of firewood put to burning.
Seeing enraged Lakshmana, who looked like a veritable god of Death at the time of dissolution of the universe, hundreds of monkeys, their limbs trembling in fear ran in different directions.
Having entered Sugriva's palace, the monkeychiefs reported the arrival of angry Lakshmana.
But Sugriva who was engrossed in overtures with passionate Tara, did not heed the words of the monkeychiefs.
Commanded by the ministers, the monkeys who looked like fierce mountains, elephants and clouds that caused horripilation, left the place at once.
The monkeys, their faces, deformed, their nails and teeth like weapons were dreadful and horrifying in appearance, proud as tigers
Of them some possessed the strength of ten, some a hundred and some a thousand elephants. All of them were of equal valour.
Enraged Lakshmana saw the huge inacccessible city of Kishkinda filled with  mighty strong and fierce monkeys holding trees in hand.
The mighty monkeys came out of the entrance of the ironboundary wall from beneath and made their appearance and stood in full attention.
The sensible warrior, recognising Sugriva's dereliction of duty and his own brother's agony once again flew into fury.
Sighing hot, deep breath, eyes turned red in anger, this tiger among men appeared like fire with smoke (The sigh was smoke and red eyes, fire).
His bow was like the hood of a snake,with the iron nails fixed on the tip of his arrows like moving fangs and his own brightness like the venom of the fivehooded snake.
Dismayed, Angada approached Lakshmana, who was glowing like fire at the time of dissolution of the world and enraged like the lord of serpents.
Renowned Lakshmana, with his eyes turned red in anger said to Angada 'O dear, inform Sugriva, about my arrival'.
'O subduer of enemies speak in this way: 'Lakshmana, the dear younger brother of Rama has come to you and waits for your presence at the entrance, burning in grief of his elder brother. Well, if you like to hear his words, do as you please.' 'Return swiftly after saying so.'
On hearing Lakshmana's words Angada became sad. He approached his father (Sugriva) and said 'Saumitri has come'. (This sloka appears an interpolation).
On hearing Lakshmana's words powerful Angada felt agitated. His face turned pale. He went and prostrated at once to the king and then to the queen, Ruma.
Highly brilliant Angada holding his father's feet first, then mother's and thereafter Ruma's, reported the matter to  Sugriva.
The monkey was too drowsy with drink, too intoxicated with passion to come back to his senses.
Looking at angry Lakshmana, and scared at heart, the monkeys started making a noise in order to please him.
They saw Lakshmana advancing like a mighty flood and went near him making sounds like the thunderbolt or a lion.
By the great sound (of the monkeys) the drunken redeyed vanara king awakened, his garlands and ornaments in disarray.
On hearing Angada's words the two ministers named Plaksha and Prabhava who were perrmitted to have audience with the queens went to the harem on invitation from Angada. They reported to Sugriva about the arrival of Lakshmana who had come to speak to him about matters regading wealth and righteousness.
Both of them sat close by Sugriva who was like Indra and said these pleasing words:
'Rama and Lakshmana, both the brothers venerable and true to their promise, have conferred on you sovereignty and have extended friendship.'
'Of the two, only Lakshmana is standing at the entrance wielding his bow in hand. The monkeys are trembling in fear and running about, making a loud noise'.
'By the command of Rama, his brother has come to you, Rama's words as charioteer and his work as chariot'.
'O blameless king Tara's son, Angada, has sent us into your presence. Lakshmana has come.'
'O lord of monkeys Valiant Lakshmana is standing at the entrance,eyes filled with anger as if he would burn the vanaras'.
'O great king Go at once with your son and relations, salute him now and avert his anger'.
'O king be true to your promise to his brother, righteous Rama without fail. Honour the agreement.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfirst sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.
On hearing about Lakshmana's anger from Angada, prudent Sugriva consulted his counsellors.
Sugriva, being skilled in secret assessment of matters, considering the merits and demerits, spoke to his council of ministers capable of intelligent counselling:
'Indeed I have not uttered any harsh word or done anything wrong. I, therefore, wonder why Rama's brother, Lakshmana is angry with me?
'Some enemies, who are always searching for imaginary faults of mine might have poisoned Lakshmana's ears.
'In the meanwhile, (right now) all of you should think quietly and try to know the reason (for Lakshmana's anger), using your intellect and expertise logically and decide( the course of action).
'I have no fear either from Lakshmana or from Rama. However, when a friend is enraged without reason, it creates misgivings.
'It is easy to earn a friend but keeping the friendship sustained is difficult. Due to fickleness of mind friendship gets broken even on flimsy grounds.
'Therefore, I am apprehensive of Rama. I am not able to repay the help he has rendered to me'.
When Sugriva spoke thus, Hanuman the great monkey, submitted in the presnce of the monkeyministers, applying his own logic:
'It is not at all a matter of surprise, O king of vanara clan, that you forgot the good service rendered to you with utmost sense of friendship.
'To remove your fear and to please you, the great hero Rama has killed Vali, an equal to Indra in valour.
'Rama's anger is purely out of love for you. He has sent Lakshmana, a bestower of prosperity to you. There is no doubt about it.
'You knows best the passage of time (changing seasons). But you are not aware out of inattention that the auspicious autumn has set in, making the garden lush green with blossoms of Saptachada flowers.
'The sky from which the dark clouds have completely disappeared is illumined with planets and stars. The rivers and tanks as well as all directions are pleasant.
'O chief of monkeys it is time for military expeditions. Since you are intoxicated you are not aware of this, Lakshmana has come here evidently for this.
'The message sent by a man who is in distress, and is deprived of his wife should be accepted even if they are harsh since he is a great self (who has rendered you help).
'In these circumstances the best way is seeking apology from Lakshmana with folded hands. I do not see any way other than this.
'The counsellors and ministers appointed by a king should certainly give good advice, without fear. This I tell you since I have faith in my words.
'He who deserves propitiation, should not be offended, more so by a  grateful man, remembering the  help received by him earlier.
'O king bow down your head along with your son, friends and relations and honour the oath just as a wife subordinates to the will of the husband. Stand by obediently.
'O king of monkeys It is not right for you to overlook the commands of Rama or Lakshmana even in mind. You know the superhuman virtues of Rama, particularly his valour. The two brothers are like Indra (and Upendra) in valour and might.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्वात्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtysecond sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
Instructed by Rama, and having been permitted, Lakshmana, the slayer of enemies entered the frightful cave of Kishkinda.
Seeing Lakshmana, the huge and mighty monkey gatekeepers stood at the entrance and greeted him with folded hands.
The monkeys kept away out of fear to see the son of Dasaratha, who was angry and sighing deeply.
Lakshmana, the bestower of fortune, saw the mammoth cave inlaid with gems and precious stones and forests full of delightful flowers.
The palace was thronged with elevated mansions and illumined with jewels of all kinds. The trees were in bloom and the fruits satisfied every one's wish.It was splendid.
The inhabitants of Kishkinda being sons of gods and gandharvas, were of beautiful appearance wearing wonderful garlands. They could change their form at their free will. They were delightful.
The royal roads were filled with fragrant unguents, like sandal, agaru and lotus incenses, finesmelling honey of several kinds and happy inhabitants.
Lakshmana saw tall buildings comparable to Vindhya and Meru mountains and pure water flowing from the mountain streams.
On the royal road, Lakshmna saw beautiful homes of monkeychiefs Angada, Mainda, Dwivida, Gavaya, Gavaksha, Gaja, Sarabha, Vidyunmalin, Sampati, Suryaksha, Hanuman, Veerabahu, Subahu, the great Nala, Kumuda and Sushena. Similarly he saw the homes of Tara and Jambavan, Dadhivaktra, Nila, Supatala and Sunetra. (Tara mentioned here is a male monkey.)
These homes were shining like white clouds, with wonderful garlands hung on, filled with abundance of wealth, grains and best of females.
The abode of Sugriva was encircled by a white rampart and unapproachable.It was enchanting like the abode of Indra. The mansion tops were like the white peaks of Kailas mountain filled with blossoming trees which could yield all kinds of fruits to suit one's taste. The trees were huge like dark clouds, cool and shady with wonderful flowers in full bloom, the riches gifted by Indra, were delightful. The entrance was guarded by mighty monkeys holding weapons in hand. It had a golden archway at the entrance decorated with wonderful garlands and strings of golden flowers. Saumitri of great prowess entered the rich abode of Sugriva just as the Sun enters huge clouds unobstructed.
Righteous Lakshmana crossed the seven enclosures filled with different kinds of people and saw a great harem full of several bright gold and silver cots, excellent  seats here and there with best of cushions spread.
As he entered, he heard melodious sounds of string instruments and music worded to metre with different kinds of tunes.
Powerful Lakshmana saw many females of different forms proud of their youth and charm at the palace of Sugriva.
Lakshmana saw women with a good lineage adorned with colourful flower garlands and choicest ornaments engaged in making garlands and arranging fruits. He also saw at Sugriva's palace attendants, gentle, welldressed, contented and not too busy.
Illustrious Lakshmana felt abashed on hearing the jingling of girdle bells and tinkling of the women's anklets.
On hearing the sounds of ornaments (of females), heroic Lakshmana lost his temper quickly. He pulled his bowstring forcefully in wrath producing frightening sound filling all quarters.
Aware of the anger of Rama (who likes it not), the longarmed Lakshmana moved away from the spot (abstained from entering private apartments) as per tradition, receded to a lonely place and stood.
Then, sensing the arrival of Lakshmana, by the sound of his bow string, Sugriva the lord of vanaras, alighted at once from the throne.
'Truly Saumitri, the loving brother of Rama has arrived as announced by Angada earlier'.
As proclaimed by Angada and also from the sound of the twang, Sugriva knew about the arrival of Lakshmana. His mouth parched (with fear).
Then Sugriva, the best of monkeys got agitated at heart out of fear. He saw the pleasing Tara and said to her these good words clearly:
'O Tara with beautiful eyebrows this younger brother of Rama is normally softhearted. But today he arrived here angry. What could be the reason?
'O blemishless Tara  What is the cause of young Lakshmana's anger? Great men do not display anger without reason.
'If anything displeasing has been done by us, you should know and tell me quickly. You ought to speak to him at once.
'O lovely lady or else, you should see him personally and propitiate him with your soothing words.
'Lakshmana will be clear of all doubts on seeing you and will not be angry. Great men are not harsh to women.
'Start talking to him with pleasing words and make him happy. Then I shall see Lakshmana with eyes like lotuspetals, a subduer of enemies'.
Tara, whose eyes were drowsy with drink, whose long gold string of the girdle was hanging loose appeared before Lakshmana with faltering steps and bent low, bashful of her appearance. (It suggests a state of exhaustion after sexual pleasures).
Since prince Lakshmana is a great man, he stood with his face down and showing no reaction, controlled his anger due to the presence of a female standing close by.
Setting aside her shyness for being in a drunken state, and observing Lakshmana's favourable disposition, she spoke meaningful words in a pleasing manner with friendly eloquence:
'O noble prince what is the cause of your anger? Who has disrespected your command? Who can approach without fear forest fire rushing towards a thicket of dried pieces of wood?'
Having heard Tara's unhesitant submission spoken in a pleasant and friendly manner, Lakshmana replied:
'O lady, your husband engrossed in sensual pleasures, has lost sight of dharma and artha. Why don't you understand it in the interest of your husband whose wellwisher you are?
'O Tara that we are in grief Sugriva does not realize. He is not attending to state affairs. He is only enjoying drinking in the company of ministers.
'The king of monkeys has already spent four months, enjoying drinks. He does not realize that he has flouted his promise.
'Drinking this way does not help accomplishment of dharma and artha. It destroys wealth, ambition and righteousness.
'Dharma is violated when we help not one who has helped. Loss of a virtuous friend leads to great loss of wealth. It results in destruction.
'You have a strong sense of duty. You ought to tell him his duty and what we should do in this situation.
Tara heard the sweet words of Lakshmana which showed his good understanding of dharma and artha. What she said to him in reply reflects her faith in Sugriva's effort to help Rama's cause:
'O prince this is not the time to get angry with your own people. He (Sugriva) is your friend and wishes to do your work. You should bear with him even if he makes a mistake.
'O prince how can you, richly endowed with virtues be angry with an inferior person? How can a person like you, preeminent in virtues,and a source of great penance fall a victim to anger?
'I know about the anger of (Rama), the friend of Sugriva. I am aware of the time limit set for his work. I am aware of our omissions in this regard. I also know about the mission.
'O Lakshmana I am aware of the irresistible strength of lust born out of the body. I am aware of Sugriva's indifference to his duty due to his  passion with whomsoever it be.
'You are under the grip of anger and your mind is not involved in carnal desire. One who is engaged in sensual pleasures does not reckon time and place, nor does he consider artha and dharma.
'O slayer of enemy heroes pardon Sugriva, the lord of vanara clan, who is to you a brother. He is here indulging in sports of love with me. He has no sense of shame about his passion.
'Even sages committed to piety and austerity are sometimes deluded by sensual gratification. He is a king and a monkey who is fickle by nature. How can he be not tempted by sensual pleasures'?
Overcome by drunkenness, Tara once again spoke to Lakshmana of unfathomable prowess, in a meaningful way keeping in view the welfare of her playful and drunken lord:
'O best of men although overpowered by sense pleasures, Sugriva has already initiated efforts for the accomplishment of your work.
'O great warrior monkeys residing at different mountains who can assume any form they like have arrived in hundreds and thousands of crores.
'O longarmed one  come in. You have been standing out guarding your character. It is not a mistake to see the wife of a pious person with a friendly feeling.
Strongarmed Lakshmana, a subduer of enemies, permitted by Tara entered the harem immediately (thinking of the urgency of the task).
Lakshmana saw famous Sugriva, difficult to be conquered, seated on a golden throne strewn around with cushions, decorated with ornaments of different colours, endearing in appearance, decked with beautiful garlands and clothes. He was surrounded by women adorned with most fascinating ornaments and garlands. Bewildered at the sight, Lakshmana's eyes turned red in anger. He appeared like Yama, lord of death.
On seeing the angry Lakshmana, a bull among men, who could not be obstructed,  enter in,  Sugriva was disturbed.
Seeing enraged Lakshmana, son of Dasaratha, sighing heavily, glowing like bright fire burning with the sorrow of Rama, Sugriva jumped out of his seat quitting the decorated golden throne just as Indra's decorated banner is raised up suddenly.
As soon as Sugriva jumped up ,Ruma and other womenfolk rose to their feet like the clusters of stars around the fullMoon in the sky.
With eyes red as blood through drunkenness,prosperous Sugriva was shaken like the Kalpa tree.He stood there and offered salutations(to Lakshmana) with folded hands.
Looking at Sugriva surrounded by Ruma and other women like the Moon among stars, infuriated Lakshmana said
'Only a king who is an heir to a noble family, compassionate, and selfcontrolled, grateful and truthful excels in the world.
'Which king can be more malicious than the one who makes false promises and adopts an unrighteous path towards those who helped him?
'If a man tells a lie about a horse, he commits the sin of killing a hundred horses. If one tells a lie about a cow, he shares the sin of killing a thousand cows. If one tells a lie about a man, it is equal to the sin of killing oneself and his own people.
'O lord of monkeys he who, having accomplished his task first with the help of his friend, does not return the help is ungrateful. Such a person deserves to be killed.It applies to all beings.
'O lord of the monkeys here is a verse worthy of appreciation by all the worlds, sung by a brahmin, when he saw an ungrateful person. Listen:
'There is expiation for one who kills a brahmin, a drunkard, a thief and a violator of sacred vows. But there is no atonement for an ungrateful man.'
'O monkey you have already achieved your objective (with the help of Rama) but have not helped Rama in return. You are surely an ignoble and ungrateful liar.
'O monkey, if you are grateful to Rama you should wish to search for Sita. Indeed, you should make efforts to take it up.
'You have failed to keep your word. You are engaged in worldly pleasures. Rama did not know that you are a serpent croaking like a frog.
'Rama is illustrious, compassionate and great. He has granted the kingdom to you, to one who is a sinner and an evilminded person.
'If you do not recognise  the help of Rama who can accomplish any deed with ease, you will be killed with my sharp arrows and meet Vali (in heaven).
'O Sugriva the path by which Vali went is not closed.I wish you do not follow him. You stand by the promise made.
'You have not seen the thunderboltlike arrows released from the bow of Rama, the renowned prince of the Ikshvaku race. Therefore you are resorting to enjoyment without any fear and have not given thought to Rama's work.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfourth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
While Lakshmana, the son of Sumitra, was glowing like fire with his brilliance, thus spoke the moonfaced Tara:
'O Lakshmana you, in particular, should not speak to the king of vanaras in that manner. He does not deserve to hear from your mouth words which are harsh.
'O hero Sugriva, king of monkeys, is not ungrateful or deceitful, He is neither crooked nor false.
'O hero this warrior Sugriva has not forgotten the help rendered by Rama in combat which was difficult (to win).
'O scorcher of enemies it is by Rama's grace that Sugriva has attained fame, the kingdom of monkeys and Ruma and me.
'Sleep did not come to him in deep distress in the past, and now that great happiness has come, he does not realize that it is time to act (search for Sita). He behaves like sage Viswamitra.
'O Lakshmana great sage Visvamitra was in union with an apsara Gritachi for ten years and felt it was just one day indeed
'If the brilliant and the most distinguished of those who knew the value of time did not realise the passing of time, what can be said of an ordinary person?
'O Lakshmana you should pardon him since he is not yet satisfied, though tired, with the struggle for the fulfilment of his sensual pleasures.
'O dear Lakshmana not knowing the true intention of Sugriva, it is not proper for you to be rashly angry like an ordinary man.
'O bull among men men with right vision like you do not become angry instantly without right thinking.
'O Lakshmana, knower of dharma, give up your agitation arising out of great anger. Be composed for the sake of Sugriva.
'I feel Sugriva should (is prepared to) renounce the monkeykingdom, wealth, grains and other treasures and even Ruma and me for the pleasure of Rama.
'Killing Ravana in war, Sugriva will restore Sita soon to Rama.Rama will join Sita like Moon joins Rohini.
'The number of demons in Lanka is reported to be a hundred thousand crore, three lakh, ninetynine thousand and six hundred. (Note: Indian tradition has numbers up to eighteen digits. One hundred thousand crores is equal to a 'mahapadma' which has thirteen digits. The number described here is 1000000399600.)
'It is not possible to kill Ravana who has stolen Sita without killing those unassailable demons who can assume any form at their will.
'O Lakshmana moreover it is not possible for Sugriva alone to kill the wicked Ravana without the help of the monkeys.
Vali, the wellinformed lord of the monkeys, has given an account of the demons. The source of the account is not known to me.Therefore I am speaking from what I have heard.
'Monkey chiefs have been sent to bring multitudes of monkey leaders to help you in the battle.
'Sugriva is awaiting the arrival of the powerful and strong vanaras without whose help he cannot accomplish Rama's task.Therefore he has not yet started (the search).
'O Lakshmana since Sugriva has already promulgated an ordinance to all the mighty vanaras, they should be all arriving by now.
'Looking at your angry countenance with bloodred eyes, the wives of  the foremost of monkeys are frightened by the possibility of similar danger of the past (of Vali's death) and do not find peace of mind.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfifth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
Thus the gentlenatured Saumitri accepted Tara's courteous words sanctioned by dharma.
Sugriva, king of the vanara clan, cast aside his great fear when Lakshmana accepted the words of Tara just as one discards a wet garment from the body.
Thereupon Sugriva, relieved from his drunken state tore off the great, colourful valuable garland worn on his neck.
Sugriva, the noblest of all monkeys, spoke these polite words in a pleasing manner to Lakshmana of terrific strength:
'O Saumitri my prosperity, fame and the permanent sovereignty of vanaras had been lost. It was  regained by the grace of Rama.
'O crusher of enemies  how is it possible to repay the famous lord Rama's valour (in killing Vali)?
'Righteous Rama can merely restore Sita with my assistance. By his own fiery energy he will kill Ravana.
'Rama shattered seven huge trees, a mountain and earth with a single arrow. What assistance does he need?
'O Lakshmana the twang of his bow shook even the mountains and the earth. What assistance does he need?
'O Lakshmana, bull among men I shall only join him along with others when he leads the army to kill Ravana.
'If I have committed even a little transgression in my faith in Rama or affection for him and exceeded the time limit, my mistakes are to be excused as one would pardons a servant. No one is flawless in the world.'
Lakshmana who was happy to hear great Sugriva replied affectionately:
'O Sugriva, king of monkeys when you are extending due courtesy to my brother,he has a guardian in you by all means.
'You are powerful and straightforward by nature.You are humble and noble. Therefore, you deserve the high prosperity of the kingdom of the monkeys.
'O Sugriva with you as associate, valiant hero Rama will kill his enemies in war very soon. There is no doubt about it.
'O Sugriva you know dharma.You are grateful and will not turn back from the battle. So your words are true and befitting.
'O best of monkeys barring you and my elder brother, who else would be capable of speaking this way about themselves even when you are aware of other's faults?
'You who are equal to Rama in valour and strength, will continue to be the gift of gods to us for long.
'Nevertheless I want you to proceed from here with me at once and reassure your friend who is agrieved due to the abduction of his wife.
इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामयणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षट्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtysix sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Having heard the great Lakshmana Sugriva said to Hanuman, the minister who stood by his side:
'Send for the monkeys residing at the five mountains of Mahendra, Himavan, Vindhya, Kailasa and the whitepeaked mount Mandara those monkeys residing on the western mountains, on the sea shore and on mount Udaya shining like the rising Sun monkeys like dark clouds shining in the twilight Sun those at the fierce Padmatala garden and those at the Anjana mountain who  resemble dark clouds like collyrium and are as strong as elephants those monkeys of golden complexion residing at the red arsenic mountain caves beside mount Meru those on mount Meru and Dhumra who are of bright red colour like the rising Sun drinking liquor Maireya the monkeys of terrific speed at mount Maharuna those staying at the delightful hermitages in the forests, and those living on the ground all must be cajoled and persuaded to report at once.
'Send for the monkeys residing at the five mountains of Mahendra, Himavan, Vindhya, Kailasa and the whitepeaked mount Mandara those monkeys residing on the western mountains, on the sea shore and on mount Udaya shining like the rising Sun monkeys like dark clouds shining in the twilight Sun those at the fierce Padmatala garden and those at the Anjana mountain who  resemble dark clouds like collyrium and are as strong as elephants those monkeys of golden complexion residing at the red arsenic mountain caves beside mount Meru those on mount Meru and Dhumra who are of bright red colour like the rising Sun drinking liquor Maireya the monkeys of terrific speed at mount Maharuna those staying at the delightful hermitages in the forests, and those living on the ground all must be cajoled and persuaded to report at once.
'Send for the monkeys residing at the five mountains of Mahendra, Himavan, Vindhya, Kailasa and the whitepeaked mount Mandara those monkeys residing on the western mountains, on the sea shore and on mount Udaya shining like the rising Sun monkeys like dark clouds shining in the twilight Sun those at the fierce Padmatala garden and those at the Anjana mountain who  resemble dark clouds like collyrium and are as strong as elephants those monkeys of golden complexion residing at the red arsenic mountain caves beside mount Meru those on mount Meru and Dhumra who are of bright red colour like the rising Sun drinking liquor Maireya the monkeys of terrific speed at mount Maharuna those staying at the delightful hermitages in the forests, and those living on the ground all must be cajoled and persuaded to report at once.
'Send for the monkeys residing at the five mountains of Mahendra, Himavan, Vindhya, Kailasa and the whitepeaked mount Mandara those monkeys residing on the western mountains, on the sea shore and on mount Udaya shining like the rising Sun monkeys like dark clouds shining in the twilight Sun those at the fierce Padmatala garden and those at the Anjana mountain who  resemble dark clouds like collyrium and are as strong as elephants those monkeys of golden complexion residing at the red arsenic mountain caves beside mount Meru those on mount Meru and Dhumra who are of bright red colour like the rising Sun drinking liquor Maireya the monkeys of terrific speed at mount Maharuna those staying at the delightful hermitages in the forests, and those living on the ground all must be cajoled and persuaded to report at once.
'This is in addition to the monkeys for whom swiftfooted messengers have already been sent.
'Get all the monkeys including those engaged in carnal pleasures and those slow in movement all at once on my command.
'Kill those evilminded ones within ten days for disobeying the royal orders.
'The hundreds of thousands of crores of obedient lionlike monkeys should proceed in all directions at my command.
'Fierce monkeys, comparable to clouds and mountains in appearance shall go as though covering the sky from here at my command.
Having heard Sugriva's command, Hanuman, son of the Windgod, sent powerful monkeys in all directions.
The monkeys ordered by the king, traversed the pathway of birds and heavenly bodies, the path Lord Visnu had trod. [Note: the sky is called Vishnupada since Lord Visnu set his foot on the sky in his incarnation as Vamana.]
The messenger monkeys drove in all those living on the sea shore, mountains, forests as well as banks of lakes in order to serve the cause of Rama.
In response to the command of the king, who was like death to them, the monkeys came at once, driven by fear from Sugriva.
Then three crores of swiftfooted monkeys, dark like collyrium, rushed forth to the mountain to meet Rama.
Ten crores of monkeys shining like pure molten gold, staying on the best of mountains where the Sun sets moved towards Kishkinda.
From the peaks of Kailasa mountain moved out one thousand crores of monkeys who were of bright colour like the lion's mane.
Then monkeys residing at mount Himavan feeding on fruits and roots came in thousands of crores. (This number is called Shankha 1000,000,000,000,0, it is one digit higher than Mahapadma.)
From the Vindhya mountain came down thousands of crores of swiftfooted monkeys of terrific deeds. They were fierce like fire (Angaraka).
The monkeys residents of Tamala forest on the shores of the ocean of milk feeding on coconuts arrived from the groves in countless number.
An army of swiftmoving monkeys came from the caves, from the banks of rivers and forests as though it was swallowing up the Sungod.
The monkeys sent earlier to hasten all their counterparts saw mount Himavat from the great tree.
A divine, wonderful, delightful Yagna dedicated to Lord Siva used to be performed on the beautiful (Himalayan) mountain in the past so that the minds of all deities were satisfied.
There the monkeys saw the Yajna, and partook the fruits and roots produced out of the havis which tasted sweet like nectar.
Any one who shares even a little of the divine, delicious fruits and roots grown out of that havis will have no hunger or thirst for a month.
The monkey leaders who lived on fruits collected the divine fruits, roots as well as  medicinal herbs.
The monkeys also collected finesmelling flowers from the sacrificial altar to please Sugriva with.
The monkey leaders from all over the earth arrived quickly, leading the hordes of them.
In a short while the swiftmoving leaders of the monkeys groups reached Kishkinda quickly.
Offering all kinds of medicinal herbs, fruits and roots collected, to Sugriva the monkeys said:
On hearing the report from the monkeys, Sugriva the king of vanaras, accepted all the gifts they had brought him, with great pleasure.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyseventh sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, of the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
On receiving all the gifts presented by the monkeys, Sugriva permitted them to go happy.
The monkey heroes sent by Sugriva performed the task assigned to them and felt powerful Rama's task has been achieved (a successful beginning has been made).
Cheering Sugriva, the foremost among the monkeys, the mighty Lakshmana said in a humble way: 'O goodnatured Sugriva if you would like to come to Rama let us depart  from Kishkinda.
Hearing the gentle words of Lakshmana, spoken lovingly in that manner and asking him to come along with him, Sugriva was highly pleased.He agreed to go with him and said, 'As you please. I abide by your command'.
Sugriva spoke to Lakshmana endowed with auspicious signs, and thereupon permitted Tara and other women to leave the place.
Sugriva called in the monkeys who deserved audience of the female folk of the royal family. They came forward quickly with folded hands welcoming the heroes.
Then seeing the monkeys who had come there, king Sugriva who was shining like the Sungod asked them to get a palanquin ready at once.
On hearing the king, the monkeys who were quick to act placed a beautiful palanquin in front of him.
Seeing the palanquin placed in front of Sugriva, the chief of the monkeys requested Lakshmana to get in quickly.
With this Sugriva, shining like the Sungod, entered along with Lakshmana the golden palanquin carried by ablebodied monkeys.
With a pale white umbrella over his head, white yaktail fans and sounds of conches and drums, Sugriva set out receiving greetings from monkeys, rejoicing in his royal glory.
Surrounded by hundreds of monkeys wielding various sharp weapons, Sugriva went forth to the region where Rama resided৷৷
Having reached the place where Rama lived, brilliant Sugriva along with Lakshmana descended from the palanquin.
Thereafter Sugriva followed by the monkeys approached Rama, and stood with folded hands.
Rama was pleased on beholding the great army of monkeys standing, resembling a pond full of lotus buds.
Sugriva touched Rama's feet, bending his head down, and Rama lifted him up and embraced him with love and great regard.
Embracing him, Rama offered him a seat on the ground and said:
'O best among the heroic monkeys, a king who apportions his time properly towards pursuit of dharma, artha and kama is a hero and deserves to be a king.
'One who neglects dharma and artha and pursues only kama (sensuous enjoyment) is like a man asleep on top of the tree, waking up only to realize that he has fallen down.
'O king of monkeys, slayer of enemies the time to act has arrived. Think of the strategies with your ministers and other monkeys.
On hearing this, Sugriva said to Rama,'O longarmed one the fortune, fame and soverignty of vanaras which was lost has been regained only by your grace.
'O victorious lord he who does not repay the help got through your grace and your brother's is despicable among men.
'O destroyer of enemies hundreds of strong vanara chiefs gathered from all over the earth have reached here.
'O Rama valiant bears of fierce appearance, also golangulas (a variety of monkeys with tails like cows') familiar with the inaccessible fortresses of forest have come. These monkeys are sons of divine beings and gandharvas who can assume any form at will. They are on their way along with their armies.
O scorcher of enemies the vanara troops in hundred thousand crores, ayutas, sanku, arbuda, hundreds of arbudas, madhyas, antyas, samudras and parardhas (100000000000000000), are expected. O king  they are residents of Vindhya and Meru mountains, comparable to lord Indra in courage and appear like mountains Meru and Mandara.
'The monkeys who can kill ogre Ravana and his relatives in battle and bring back Maithili will be arriving shortly.
The wise statesman, Rama observing the efforts of Sugriva and his attendants looked like a blooming blue lotus through delight.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे अष्टत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends of thirtyeighth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana, composed by sage Valmiki.
On hearing Sugriva who stood with folded hands, Rama, the foremost among the upholders of righteousness, hugged him and said:
'O scorcher of enemies, gentle Sugriva it will not be strange if Indra showers rain, if the Sun in the sky dispels darkness with his thousand rays, and if the  Moon cools down the earth with his light, and a person like you helps his friend.
'O gentle Sugriva this your help to me is not surprising. You always help your friends and speak in a pleasing manner.
'O friend I will win over all enemies in war supported by you.You are a goodhearted friend and you alone should help me.
Just as Anuhlada (son of Hiranyakasipu and brother of Prahlada) took away, Poulomi  (Sachi, daughter of Puloma) deceiving Indra, this lowly demon took away Sita, daughter of the king of Videha.
'I will kill Ravana with my sharp arrows just as Indra, (who had done a hundred sacrifices) killed the proud father of Poulomi.
In the mean while the dust raised (by army of monkeys) all over obscured the intense heat from the sky and the radiance of the thousandrayed Sun.
By the spreading of dust, the quarters were not visible.The earth including the mountains gardens and forests was shaken up.
In a minute, the entire land was crowded with innumerable powerful monkeys of the size of mountains having sharp fangs.The monkey leaders with a hundred crore monkey followers, who could assume any form at their will mighty monkeys from the mountains, rivers and seas vanaras thundering like clouds and other free vanaras who were wanderers vanaras red in colour like the rising Sun, tawny coloured ones like the Moon some who were of the hue of white lotus filaments and some vanaras residing in mount Meru came there.
Then appeared the glorious warrior named Satavali, followed by ten thousand crore of monkeys.
(Next came) the valiant father of Tara of golden complexion like mount Meru followed by ten thousand crore of vanaras.
Likewise mighty father of Ruma, fatherinlaw of Sugriva, reached there accompanied by a thousand crore monkeys.
Then arrived Kesari, the wise and illustrious monkey, foremost and the best among vanaras, father of Hanuman. He was of the colour of lotus filaments and his countenance was red like the early morning Sun. He was accompanied by many thousands of monkeys.
Next arrived Gavaksha, king of Langurs (whose tail resembled the cow's), of fierceful courage surrounded by a thousand crore of vanaras.
Dhumra, destroyer of enemies, came next followed by two thousand crore of bears of terrible speed.
Similarly, the great warrior named Panasa, leader of the troop, reported with three crore dreadful vanaras of the size of huge mountains.
Then appeared Nila of huge body, dark like a mountain of collyrium accompanied by ten crore vanaras.
Then arrived the leader of five crore vanaras, the great warrior Gavaya who resembled a golden mountain.
Then the strong Darimukha, leader of a thousand crore monkeys approached Sugriva.
Two very powerful sons of Asvini, Mainda and Dvivida, appeared with a thousand crore vanaras.
Strong and powerful Gaja also reached Sugriva with three crore vanaras.
Glorious Jambavan, king of bears, stood before Sugriva with ten thousand crore vanaras.
Sturdy and victorious vanara called Rumanvan came swiftly followed by a hundred crore vanaras.
Then came Gandhamadana with a hundred thousand crore of vanaras following him.
Then arrived the heir apparent, Angada, whose prowess is comparable to that of his father with him came a thousand padmas and a hundred sankus of followers.
And Tara (brother of Ruma's father) of terrific valour shining like a star showed up at a distance with five crore vanaras.
Then Indrajanu the troop leader and chief of vanaras appeared along with eleven crore monkeys.
Thereafter Rambha of the colour of the rising Sun brought together an army of one thousand and one hundred ayuta troops.
Thereafter the mighty hero, leader of the troop, by name Durmukha appeared with  two crore vanaras.
And Hanuman showed up surrounded by a thousand crore vanaras of frightful valour. They looked like the peaks of Kailasa mountain.
Valiant Nala also arrived surrounded by a hundred crore and a hundred thousand treedwellers (monkeys).
Then the illustrious Dadhimukha, great Sugriva's favourite leader reached with ten crore vanaras.
Sarabha, Kumuda, Vahni and Ramhi and many other vanara troops who can assume any form at their will and others from all over the land, mountains and forest advanced towards Sugriva. All the outstanding vanaras of the earth came and covered the land.
The monkeys came leaping, jumping and roaring in enthusiasm and surrounded Sugriva just as clouds surround the Sun.
The leaders of monkeys possesing sturdy shoulders made many kinds of noises and reported to Sugriva, bending their heads in reverence.
Thereafter the vanaras came close to Sugriva freely and on reaching him stood, offering salutations with folded hands.
Sugriva, knower of dharma, at once presented all the prominent vanaras to Rama, and standing with folded hands said.
Sugriva told the chiefs to station the forces by the side  of swift mountain streams, in forests, and hills and ascertain their exact number.इत्यार्ष श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyninth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
Sugriva, lord of monkeys, who was supported by a massive army informed Rama, the tiger among men and a crusher of the enemy army
'The vanaras living in my kingdom have come and have settled down. They are strong and huge like elephants and they can assume any form at will.
'Dreadful monkeys, powerful monkeys of fierce valour who resemble demons in form, have arrived.
Powerful vanaras who have earned fame for their valiant deeds in the past, those who are indefatigable and wellknown for their valour having gained preeminence through their efforts and living on several mountains, those who can move on the earth as well as water, crores of them have arrived.
'O Rama,the subduer of foes all of them will follow your command.They are engaged in seeking the wellbeing of elders and can fulfil your wish.
'Dreadful monkeys who resemble demons have arrived along with thousands of fierce fighters.
'O tiger among men announce the proper time for action. This army is at your command. Command them.
On hearing him, Rama, Dasaratha's son, hugged Sugriva with his arms and said:
'O wise warrior I wish to know whether Vaidehi is alive or not. Let the kingdom of Ravana be found out.
'On locating Vaidehi in the kingdom of Ravana I shall take up proper course of action  in conjunction with you.
'O lord of monkeys neither I nor my brother Lakshmana should command the monkeys. You are the right person to do it.
'O king you have understood the task to be performed and, therefore, issue orders without the least hesitation.
'You are my second friend (Lakshmana being the first). You are valiant as well as wise. You are aware of timely action. You are interested in my wellbeing. You are capable. You know my purpose. You are a startegic planner'. (The present purpose is to plan the course of action. That is artha. Sugriva knows this artha very well).
'In response to Rama's desire, Sugriva beckoned a troopleader called Vinata who was wellbuilt and lofty like a mountain. And thundering like a cloud, said to him in the presence of Rama and wise Lakshmana:
'O foremost of the vanaras march forward with the sons of Moon and Sun, followed by one lakh swift monkeys towards the eastern direction full of mountains, gardens, and forests. Endowed with political wisdom, you are capable of taking right decision in accordance with time and place.
'Search for Sita in the abode of Ravana, on mountain peaks and river banks and in forests.
'Look for Sita in the beautiful places on rivers Bhagirathi, Sarayu, Kausiki and Kalindi, on the great mountains adjacent to river Yamuna, banks of rivers Saraswati, Sindhu, Sona with crystalclear waters, the country of Mahim and Kalamahi adorned with mountains and forests. Proceed to Brahmamala, Videha, Malava, Kasi, Kosala and Maghada with great villages, the country of Pundram, Vanga, the country famous for silk worms and the land with silver caves. (It is the eastern direction of river Saravati between Himavat and Vindhya and not east of Kiskinda)
'Search all over the place looking carefully here and there for Sita the beloved consort of Rama, daughterinlaw of Dasaratha.
'There are people who have taken shelter in the deep pits in the midst of the sea, in deep valleys, mountains, cities and broad peaks of Mandara mountain and forests.All those regions should be thoroughly searched. There are innumerable inhabitants,such as strong cannibals, some who cover their ears, some who have ears extended up to the lips, some with dreadful metallic faces, some swiftmoving, onefooted indestructible beings. There are Kirata tribes of golden complexion and handsome looks whose tuft of hair is set to the sides so that it touches their ears. These Kiratas are Islanddwellers and they eat uncooked fish.They move in waters and are fierce, known as tigerlike men (Naravyagras because half of their body is human and other half is tiger in form). All the shelters of these forestdwellers should be searched well.Those who can be sent by crossing mountains, those who can leap (in air) and those who can swim through waters may be also dispatched.
'Go beyond Java island filled with precious gems. It has seven kingdoms. It is adorned with gold and silver mines in abundance. There is a mountain Sisira (abode of Garuda) beyond Java Island. It touches the sky with its lofty cliffs. Gods and demons visit this mountain. You may look for illustrious Rama's consort in these inaccessible mountains, waterfalls and forests.
'Therefrom reach out to the swiftflowing river Sona which has redcoloured waters. Then crossing the sea which is the abode of Siddhas and Charanas search the different rivers reaching the sea, and the picturesque and wonderful forests to trace the abode of Ravana who has stolen Sita.
'Then you may continue your search in the frightening islands of the sea as well as the sea which roars when stirred up by the wind.
'Demons of huge bodies catch the shadows of passersby in that place as they have been hungry for long and have the permission of Brahma to do so.
'Reach out to the great roaring ocean which looks like a black cloud at the time of dissolution, inhabited by great serpents.Go through the bank of the river, and touch the frightening sea named Lohita of red coloured water.You will see a huge silkcotton tree in that place.
'You would see there a house of Garuda constructed by Visvakarma. It looks like the Kailasa mountain and is adorned with different kinds of gems.
'There are frightening demons called Mandehas of different forms, fearsome as huge mountains hanging down the mountain peaks.
'Those demons  keep dropping down in water at the time of Sunrise every day, by the power of Gayatri mantras recited by brahmins scorched by the heat of the Sun. Again and again they keep hanging  on to the cliffs.
'You who are unassailable by the enemies, will see the milky ocean appearing like clouds, resembling a pearl necklace with its rows of waves.
'In the midst of that ocean stands a majestic white mountain named Rishaba surrounded by trees filled with silver flowers emitting wonderful fragrance.There is also a lake named Sudarsana with glittering silver lotuses having gleaming golden filaments. Royal swans inhabit these surroundings.
'The deities, called charanas, yakshas and kinneras, also apsarasas keep coming there to stoll by that lotus pond.
'O monkeys going beyond the milky ocean you will see the seas most dreadful to all creatures.
'Here is born Hayamukha, out of the fastspreading fire of anger of the ocean. Its movable and  immovable creatures constitute his food.
'You can hear the sounds of helpless oceanic creatures crying loudly on seeing the burning face of Vadava.
'Thirteen yojanas to the north of this ocean of pure waters is a huge golden mountain called Jatarupasila.
'O monkeys on top of the mountain you will see Ananta, a thousandhooded serpent seated, as bright as the Moon, robed in blue, with large eyes like lotus petals bearing the load of the earth, and revered by all beings.
'Highsouled Ananta's flag is a threeheaded golden palm tree shining on an altar on top of the mountain.
'The flag of Ananta is fixed by the gods in the eastern direction. Beyond that stands the famous golden mountain behind which the sun rises. Its golden peak with a divine altar spread over a hundred yojanas touches heaven.
'The place looks beautiful with salas, palmyras, tamalas and karnikara trees in full bloom. These golden, divine flowers shine like the Sungod.
'There is a huge golden peak called Saumanas of ten yojanas in height spread over a breadth of one yojana.
'When the supreme being, Visnu took his three strides as Lord Vamana, he placed his first foot on this peak and the second on the peak of mount Meru.
'The Sun circumabulates Jambu island  and when he arrives at this lofty cliff of the mountain, it takes the northern direction and becomes visible to the world.
'Over there the great ascetics Vaikhanasas and Valakhilyas appear  like the radiating Sun.
'The region in front of this mountain is called Sudarsana Island. This island is where the Sun who gives all beings the ability to see rises.
You should search for Ravana and Vaidehi on the peak of that mountain, in the caves, in the forests here and there.
'The early morning twilight appears bright red because of the glow of the golden mountain as well as of the great Sungod.
'Here is the entrance for the earth as well as for all the worlds and since the Sun also rises from this place it is called the eastern direction.
'You may look for Ravana and also for Vaidehi even behind the mountain on the plains and also near the mountain streams and caves all over.
'Beyond, there is no Sun or Moon. Darkness pervades. It is neither accessible nor visible. It is guarded by the gods.
'You should look for Janaki everywhere -- on the mountains, in the lakes and  in the places not indicated by me.
'O chieftains monkeys can go that far. We know not what lies beyond those boundaries where no Sun shines.
'Reaching the mountain behind which the sun rises, look for Vaidehi and the home of Ravana and return by the month's end.
'If you do not report within one month, you will be killed. May you see Maithili and come back after reaching the goal.
'O monkeys go about the beloved quarter (east) of Indra bestowed with differnt kinds of forests and groves. Look out carefully for Rama's beloved Sita, spot her and return, you will live happily.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकांडे चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortieth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
Sugriva then sends in the southern direction another vanara army known for their excellence.
The extraordinary Sugriva commanded Nila, son of the firegod, Hanuman, the formidable, Jambavan, son of Brahma, Suhotra, Sarari, Saragulma, Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sushena, Vrishabam, Mainda, Dvivida, Vijaya, Gandhamadana, the two sons of Firegod, Ulkamuka and Asanga including Angada, leader of the group, to proceed. All of them were endowed with speed and valour.
Then Sugriva ordered mighty Angada to lead the group of the heroic monkeys in the southern direction.
Sugriva, the monkey king, explained to the monkey chiefs about the inaccessible places in the southern direction.
'Search for Sita all over Vindhya of a thousand peaks filled with several trees and creepers, and along the river Narmada. Then proceed to Godavari, lovely Krishnaveni, Mahanadi, Varada and Mahabhaga inhabited by terrific serpents.You may search Mekhala, Utkala and Dasarna cities, Asvavanti and Avanti countries also.
'Look for Sita in the countries of Vidarbha and Rishika, in the picturesque country of Mashaka, Vanga and Kalinga and all over Kausika. Look for her in mountains caves and on river banks, in Dandaka forest, in Godavari, in Andhra also in Pundra, Chola and Pandya countries and all over Kerala.
'Look for Sita all over mount Ayomukha (known as Malaya), rich in ores. It has wonderful peaks. It looks colourful with the forest in bloom. This great mountain is full of sandalwood forest.
'Then you will see the sacred river Cauvery with pure and auspicious water, where celestial nymphs sport.
'Dwelling on the top of that Malaya mountain you will find celebrated sage Agastya, resplendent like the Sun.
'You will then come cross the great river Tamraparni infested with alligators. Cross it with the permission of the sage pleased (with you).
'With its wonderful islands covered with lovely sandalwood forests, the river mingles with the ocean just as a young beloved meets her lover.
'O monkeys leaving that river, you will find encrusted with pearls the wonderful golden gate of the city of Pandyas (modern Madurai).
'Then on reaching the sea shore, decide the course of action. Sage Agastya has set up (between the moat of the city and and the sea) a glorious golden mountain Mahendra. Filled with colourful trees, it stretches into the sea.
'That mountain with several kinds of colourful trees and vines is frequented by gods, sages and prominent yakshas like siddhas and charanas. It is exceedingly delightful and even the thousandeyed Indra keeps visiting this place on full and new Moon days.
'Beyond this, on the other side of the sea stretching over an area of a hundred yojanas is an island difficult to reach for humans. Which you may explore.
'In the midst of the southern sea is a famous ogress, Angaraka (also Simhika) by name who swallows humans by capturing them even by their shadows.
'In this way make sure wherever you have a doubt (of Sita's presence) and proceed to look for the consort of Rama, king of limitless lustre.
'It looks bright, spreading its radiance like the Sun and Moon. It is surrounded by the sea. Its peaks appear as though scratching the sky.
'The Sun resorts to its golden peak. The Moon rests over its silver peak. Neither the ungrateful, nor the mean nor the unbelievers can behold this (phenomenon).
'O monkeys bowing down to that mountain, proceed in search of Sita. O unassailable vanaras, beyond this mountain is another called Suryavan. It is at a distance of fourteen yojanas and it is difficult to cover that distance.
'Beyond that mountain lies Vaidyuta, a hill with trees yielding lovely fruits in all seasons which can satisfy all desires.
'O monkeys eat your cherlshed roots and fruits and drink the best of honey there and proceed further.
'There you will find a mountain called Kunjara pleasing to the eye and pleasing to the heart. That is the hermitage of Agastya built by Visvakarma.
'The hermitage of Agastya is one yojana in breadth and ten yojanas in height. It is wonderful, built of gold and adorned with many gems.
'There on that mountain (Kunjara) stands a city called Bhogavati, which is the abode of serpents. It has wide corridors. Guarded on all sides, it is unassailable since it is protected by venomous serpents with sharp fangs. The wise serpent king Vasuki resides there. (Bhogavati is the replica of the city of the same name in Patala, the sixth subterranean region)
'Emerging from this city of Bhogavati, search all possible hidden places.
'With this place passed, you will see a huge mountain named Rishaba of the size of a bull  filled with all gems.
'There grow sandal trees of amazing colours like that of gorochana, padmaka (like lotus), greenish black and red as fire.
'Never touch when you see the sandal trees, for they are guarded by dreadful gandharvas named Rohitas.
'Five ghandharva kings named Sailusha, Gramani, Sigru, Subhra and Babhru who have the radiance like the Sun reside there. It is the abode of those who have done meritorious deeds.They glow like Sun, Moon and Fire.
'The divine people who have earned a place in heaven stay there at the end of their life on earth. Beyond, lies the dreadful world of deceased ancestors. It is not possible for you to enter that place.
'O heroic monkeys that is the capital of Yama (god of death) covered with pitch darkness. You can go till that place. Beyond, there is no access for the earthlings.
'Ransack this and all other places you can see. You should search for the whereabouts of Vaidehi before you return.
'He who returns  in a month to announce Sita has been found will spend his life in luxury with as much prosperity as I do have.
'None will be dearer to me than he. Even if he has made a mistake, he will be to me dear and near.
(Note:The Vindhya range and the several rivers mentioned here are not south of Kishkinda.The inconsistency is irreconcilable. Candidly speaking the geographical description is not at all factual. Some interpolator in the north (Kurukshetra as central region) has committed several anachronous inconsistencies betraying his ignorance of  geography.)इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्दाकाण्डे एकचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfirst sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
After sending the monkeys in the southern direction, Sugriva said to the cloudlike troop leader called Sushena.
King (Sugriva) went with folded hands to Tara's father, his fatherinlaw, of terrifying valour, offered salutation and said:
Sugriva  spoke to the great lustrous monkey Archisman, son of the eminent sage Marichi who possessed the wisdom and prowess of Indra and was comparable to Vaineteya (Garuda) in lustre. He also spoke to the other sons of Maricha, called Marichas, who were very strong and known as Archismalas (garlands of continuous glow) and asked all of them to proceed in the western direction.
'O foremost of monkeys with Sushena as your group leader accompanied by two hundred thousand vanaras, go and search for Vaidehi.
'O leaders of monkeys search for Sita in the countries of Saurashtra, and also Bahlika, Chandrachitra, in delightful villages and vast towns, also in Kukshi covered haphazardly with punnaga, bakula and uddalaka trees as well as ketaka shrubs.
'O monkeys the auspicious rivers with cool waters flow towards the western region. Search in the groves inhabited by ascetics, other forests, mountains, cliffs, in the desertland. Search in the inaccessible western region surrounded by mountains. Then proceed to the western ocean infested with whales and alligators, which cannot be easily disturbed.
'There the monkeys may roam about the Ketaka shrubs, tamala thickets and coconut groves.
'Look for Sita as well as the residence of Ravana.You should find the whereabouts of Sita in the mountains and forests located on the sea shore. Search in the city of Murachi, beautiful city of Jata, Avanti, Angalopa and in the unnoticed forestland. Look for her in the vast kingdoms and cities all over.
'There is a lofty mountain with a hundred peaks and great trees at the confluence of river Sindhu and the sea. It is known as Hemagiri (golden mountain).
'On the slopes of that mountain you will find lions called Pakshagamas, that is lions with wings. They carry  the whales, fishes and elephants from the sea to their shelters on the beautiful mountain slopes.
'The proud elephants wandering on the mountain slopes, and on the vast tract filled with water would be happy trumpeting like thundering clouds. They roam in the caves of lions.
'The monkeys capable of assuming any form at their will should search the scraping peaks of the golden mountain (Himagiri) with colourful trees without delay.
'O monkeys you will see the dazzling golden tip of a mountain called Pariyatra towards the end of the sea. It is extended over a hundred yojanas and  dificult to gaze because of its brilliance.
'There dwell twentyfour crore of terrific gandharvas blazing like fire who can assume any form.They lead an ascetic life.
'Collected together in thousands, and radiating like fire, they live there. Even the very brave vanaras should not go close to them.
'You should not pluck any fruits from those woods, for courageous gandharvas protect the fruits of the trees. It is difficult to go there, for those heroes have frightening bravery.
'Exert yourself in your search for Janaki. Indeed there will be no fear from them, if you behave like normal monkeys in a natural way.
'(Beyond) there  is a glorious mountain called Vajra of the colour of Vaidurya, hard as a diamond with different kinds of trees and vines.The  mountain extends evenly to a stretch of a hundred yojanas.There are caves in the mountain where you may look for her with due effort.
'Then move to the fourth part (of the western sea) where you will see  a mountain called Chakravan occupying a quarter part of the sea.You will find there a thousandspiked wheel built by Visvakarma.
'It was there that the Supreme Lord Visnu, having slain Hayagriva and Panchajanam,  recovered the discus and conch for himself.
'Look for Vaidehi and Ravana in the wide caves and colourful slopes of the (Chakravan) mountain.
'Plunge deep down into the sea and you will see a goldenpeaked mountain called Varaha, the residence of Varuna.It is extended over sixty four yojanas in the sea.
'On the (Varaha) mountain is the city called Pragjyotisha, which is full of gold.There lives the  evilminded demon Naraka.
'There all over the wonderful slopes and wide caves look for Vaidehi and Ravana.
'Possessor of tawny horses, king Indra who killed demon Pakasasana was consecrated by gods at this mountain since known as Meghavan.
'On crossing the hill ruled by Indra you will reach the rows of sixty thousand mountains of gold shining like the brilliance of the rising Sun. The mountains glow with golden trees filled with bloom.
'In the midst of the sixty thousand hills stands Meru, King of mountains. It is the northern mountain, blessed by the Sungod with a boon in the past.
'The Sungod said to mount Meru, 'By my grace all the trees and hillocks of this king of mountains will shine in golden red, the gods, gandharvas and demons who dwell here will have golden radiance '.
The Visvadevas, Vasus, Maruts, and the gods reach Meru, this great king of mountains, in the evening twilight. Worshipped by them, the Sungod sets behind the mountain and becomes invisible to all beings.
'Crossing ten thousand yojanas swiftly in half a moment, the Sun touches the mount behind which he sets.
'There is a great divine abode glowing like the Sungod on the peak of the mountain.It is a cluster of mansions built  by Visvakarma.
'It is the residence of Varuna, who holds the noose in his hand.It is an enchanting place, full of trees attracting flocks of various birds.
'Between mount Asta (the mountain behind which the Sun sets) and Meru there is a shining golden palm tree with ten high peaks and wonderful altars around.
'Look for Vaidehi and Ravana all over those inaccessible mountains, lakes and rivers.
'The sage Merusavarna, knower of dharma, famous for his penance and comparable to Brahma lives there with him on Meru.
'Bow down, touch the feet of the seer Merusavarna, who glows like the Sun and then enquire from him about Sita.
'The world of living beings is extended to this extent. The Sun dispels darkness at the end of the night and thereafter reaches the mountain behind which he sets (at the end of the day).
'O great monkeys you can go only up to that point. The Sun's rays do not extend beyond this and it has no boundaries.We do not know about the area beyond this limit.
'Go and find out Sita and the abode of Ravana. After this, return to the mountain behind which the Sun sets and come back on completion of a month.
'If you tarry beyond a month, you will be slain. My fatherin law, the brave hero will go with your group.
'You should obey him. You are meant to carry out his orders. He is not only my fatherinlaw but also a valiant, strong and powerful hero and my preceptor.
'My fatherinlaw will be your leader. His authority will be final in all matters. Accept his authority and look for Vaidehi in the western direction.
Sugriva, the bull among monkeys, having sent his fatherinlaw in the western direction, said to Satavali, troop leader of the monkeys:
'Righteous king Sugriva said to the foremost among the monkeys, Satavali what would help his cause as well as the cause of Rama:
'Take like you a hundred thousand courageous heroes, your ministers and the sons of Vaivasvata. And begin your expedition.
'Look all over the northern direction adorned with mighty Himavan as its earring, for the spouse of blameless Rama
'We should be succeessful in our endeavour when we have completed the task dear to Rama. We will be redeemed of our debt to him.
'Highsouled Rama has done a great service to us earlier. We will be blessed if we are successful in helping Rama in return.
'Our life becomes fruitful when we help a person who was not helped us. What to speak of returning the help one has rendered.
'Keeping this in mind, you, as my wellwishers, should act in a way Janaki can be traced.
'This Rama who can conquer the capitals of enemies is great. He loves and is loved by all living beings including ourselves.
'You are rich in wisdom and valour. You should search for Sita everywhere including inaccessible forests and mountain ranges.
'Search in the countries of Mlechas, Pulindas, Surasenas, Prasthalas, Bharatas, Madrakas, Kurus, Kambojas and even Yavanas, Shakas, Rattakas, Bahlikas, Rishikas, Pauravas, Tankanas, Cheenas, Paramacheenas, Niharas, Daradas and in the Himalaya mountains again and again in order to find her.
'There you should explore the dwelling of Ravana and Vaidehi, in the thickets of lodhra and lotuses and in the woods of devadaru.
'Then go and explore the hermitage of Soma inhabited by gods and gandharvas and also the great summits of mount Kala.
'Look for that great lady, Rama's consort, in the big caves and caverns all over the mountain.
'Crossing this lord of hills filled with gold, you should reach the great mountain called Sudarsana.
'Then proceed to mount Devasakha inhabited by a variety of birds adorning the trees.
'You should search for Ravana as well as Vaidehi everywhere in the thickets of that hill, near the mountain streams and also in caves.
'Beyond, there is a desolate place of hundred yojanas with no trace of life, no mountains, no trees, no rivers.
'Crossing that horripilating, desolate place quickly, you will be happy to reach the snowy Kailasa mountain.
'There is an exquisite mansion of Kubera built by Visvakarma which, embellished with gold, looks like a pale white cloud.
'There is a large lotus pond with many lotuses and lilies, inhabited by swans and ducks and frequented by groups of apasaras.
'Kubera, son of Vaisravana, a prosperous king of the yakshas (demigods) worshipped by all beings dwells there with Guhyakas.
'Look for Vaidehi and Ravana all over the caves and mountains of Kilasa of the colour of the moon.
'Therefrom proceed to mount krauncha mountain and enter carefully its cave which is reportedly difficult to access.
'Great ascetics live there. Worshipped even by the gods, these highsouled godlike ascetics shine like the very Sun.
'Ransack the peaks of Krauncha, its caves, caverns and ridges.
'There is a mountain region known as Kama, and Manasa where there are no trees. It is a bird sanctuary. Not only living beings, even gods, demons and rakshas have no access to that place.
'Beyond mount Krauncha you will find Mainaka. All of you should search for Sita in the plain lands and the ridges of the mountain.
'There on Mainaka a demon, called Maya has built a mansion all by himself. Try to look in the plain lands, ridges and deep caves of Mainaka and in the residences of kinnera women with faces of horses.
'On passing that place, you will come across a hermitage inhabited by siddhas and ascetics, Vaikhanasas and Valakilyas.
'They deserve  your reverence since they are accomplished ascetics.They are cleansed of sins by their penance.You should be polite when you ask them for information  about Sita.
'If you cross that region, you will find no Sun, no Moon, no stars, no cloud, no sound.
'That (Sunless) land shines like the radiance of the Sungod with the presence of selfeffulgent ascetics who have attained perfection in penance.
'Passing that region you will reach a mountain stream called Sailoda. On both the banks of the stream are bamboo groves called Kichakas. They waft the siddhas to and from the river. (Kichakas bend forward forming an arch and thus help sages to cross the river.)
'Thereafter you will reach the country of UttaraKuru, a resort for those who have done meritorious deeds.There are lotus ponds with golden lotuses with bluish and greenish leaves.There are thousands of rivers adorned with red and night lotuses of gold.
'There are tanks and lakes filled with lotuses shining like the rising Sun with lotus leaves having the colour of precious emeralds. The lotus filaments look like golden threads. The entire place is full of blue lotus groves, exquisite pearls and other gems.
'There the sandy river banks are rich with all kinds of colourful gems resplendent with the brightness of gold. Gold and gems glowing like fire in the best of mountains have entered these rivers.
'There the trees are filled with flowers and fruits in all seasons. Birds rest on them.  By their excellent fragrance, taste and smooth feel the fruits and flowers satisfy the desires of all. Some other excellent trees provide barks of various kinds which are used for cloth.
'Some other great trees (of the region) provide ornaments suitable for both men and women studded with precious pearls and vaidurya which give pleasure in all seasons.  Other trees put forth beautiful and highly valuable ornaments.
'The trees of that region deliver beds with colourful spreads. Some trees yield garlands of flowers pleasing to the heart.
'Some trees bring forth many  good quality drinks, eatables and also virtuous  women, young and beautiful.
There gandharvas, kinneras, siddhas, nagas and vidyadharas, radiant like the Sun, are seen sporting with their female companions.
'By virtue of their meritorious deeds (done in the previous birth) they live a luxurious life of riches and sensual pleasures with their female partners.
'Pleasing sounds of heavenly musicvocal and instrumental and laughter of celestial beings are ever heard in that region.
'There nobody is unhappy or inclined towards evil deeds and virtues in people go increasing day by day.
'Cross it and, you will reach the northern sea. In its midst is the great golden mountain, Somagiri.
'Only those who have reached the world of Indra and Brahma in heaven can see that  king of mountains.
'That place gets light and heat even though there is no Sun.
'Even divine beings, the elevenfold Samhbu, the allpervading Visnu and Lord Brahma surrounded by Brahmarshis (divine seers) reside there.
'You should not go beyond the north of Kuru. No living being can trespass it.
'It is difficult even for gods to reach Somagiri. You should return immediately after seeing that mountain.
'O monkey leaders it is not possible for monkeys to go beyond. The Sun does not shine beyond that place and it is not visible. We do not know what lies beyond that (Somagiri).
'You should keep in mind the places described. You may also think of other places I might have omitted.
'O heroic monkeys comparable to fire If you are successful in finding Vaidehi you will be carrying out your duty.  Rama will be highly pleased by your action. My pleasure will be even greater.
'O monkeys, when you have accomplished your goal, you will be honoured by me as though you have returned after scoring a victory over the enemy. You will roam this earth with your relatives, rejoicing in the company of your loved ones.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends of fortythird sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
Sugriva mentioned about the capacity of Hanuman, the best of monkeys as he knew he would surely succeed in accomplishing the task.
Sugriva, king of the monkeys, spoke, highly pleased, to Hanuman, the warrior son of the Windgod advancing towards him:
'O best of monkeys I scarcely see a hero comparable to your speed on earth or in space or sky or heaven or water.
'O hero, O great monkey in movement, speed, brilliance and quickness you are similar to your mighty father, the Windgod.
'I do not know any living being equal to you in brilliance on this earth. Therefore, you alone know how to secure Sita.Go ahead
'O learned Hanuman I am of opinion that in you alone rest strength, wisdom, prowess, ability to act in accordance with time and place and knowledge of statecraft'.
Having understood that Hanuman was capable of accomplishing the goal, Rama started reflecting as follows:
'This  monkey  king, Sugriva has confidence in Hanuman that he will by all means accomplish the task.'
'The king Sugriva knows for sure that if Hanuman goes forth, success is assured. So he favours him.'
The mighty Rama was happy in his heart to see Hanuman. He felt as if the task is achieved.
Rama, scorcher of enemies, gladly gave Hanuman a ring inscribed with his name as a mark of identification by princess (Sita). And said:
'O distinguished monkey Janaka's daughter will greet you without any hesitation when you present this signet to her. She will know that you have come from me.
'O great hero your enterprise,  prowess coupled with courage and Sugriva's message to you seem to indicate to me about the success of your mission'.
The foremost among the monkeys took the ring given to him, placed it on his forehead and saluated it with folded palms. He then prostrated at the feet of Rama and departed.
Like the moon adorned by hosts of stars in the cloudless sky, the mighty heroic Hanuman, the great son of the Windgod, shone in the midst of the army of monkeys.
O Hanuman son of the Windgod, O valiant among the Vanaras, I bank on your strength. Do whatever you can with your mighty valour so that the daughter of Janaka can be found.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुश्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfourth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
Summoning the entire body of vanaras, Sugriva, the bull among monkeys, said, 'Go to the places I have described and look for  Sita in order to fulfil Rama's objective'.
Having understood Sugriva's strict orders, the forces of monkeys started moving. They spread like locusts all over the earth.
Rama accompanied by Lakshmana stayed back at Prasravana mountain looking forward for the expiry of the month fixed for the monkeys to trace Sita's whereabouts.
Then the monkey warrior Satavali departed for the north, surrounded by kings of mountains.
Vinata, leader of the monkeys, set out for the eastern direction.The troop leader,  son of the Windgod along with Angada and Tara left for the south inhabited by Agastya.
'The chieftain Sushena, tiger among the monkeys, started quickly for the fearsome western direction ruled by Varuna.
Sugriva, chief of the army of monkeys, having sent the leaders to all quarters felt relieved and rejoiced.
Addressed thus  by the king, all the monkeys departed quickly from there for their respective directions with all enthusiasm.
The powerful monkeys went gallopping and chattering, leaping and screaming.
Thus addressed by the king, the leaders of the monkeys shouted, 'We will kill Ravana and get back Sita'.
'I shall kill Ravana singlehanded in war and quickly get back Janaka's daughter churning (the enemy army).' (said one)
'I will alone restore Sita, exhausted and trembling (in fear), even from the nether world. Wait here' (said another leader).
'I will smash trees, shatter mountains, cleave the earth and churn up the seas'. (said a another).
'I can doubtless cross a distance of a hundred yojanas' said one. Another said,' I can leap a hundred yojanas more'.
When the chieftains of the monkeys left, Rama enquired Sugriva, how he had come to know  the regions of the entire earth (which is a mandala. a circular form).
Then offering reverential salutation to Rama, Sugriva said, 'I shall narrate in detail. Listen, O bull among men
Vali chased the demon Dundubhi in buffalo form into a cave of mount Malaya in order to kill him.
'Then I waited at the entrance of the cave with due loyalty. A year passed. Yet Vali did not return.
'There seeing the cave overflowing with the gushing blood, I was bewildered, thinking that my brother might have been killed. I suffered intense agony.
'Thereafter, convinced that my brother was killed, I placed a mountainsize rock at the entrance of the cave so that Dundubhi will be destroyed, unable to come out of the cave.
'I lost hope of his life and came back to Kishkinda. Having got the kingdom, and also Ruma and Tara, I was anointed king and ruled it fearlessly with all friends.
'The evilminded Vali, having lost his selfcontrol, ran after me in anger, to kill me and my ministers. I kept running.
'Then I ran in the eastern direction and saw many trees, lakes, rivers and beautiful mountains.
'There I saw, filled with minerals the mountain behind which the Sun rises and the milky ocean frequented by the apsaras.
'O king chased thus by Vali, I ran and turned back and ran againfast.
'Then chased by Vali, I changed my present direction from the east towards the southern quarter where Vindhya mountain stood with its, beautiful sandal trees.
'I was looking at the trees and mountains in the southern direction, I reached the western quarter pursued by Vali.
'Looking at the places around, I reached the best of mountains where the Sun sets (I found Vali still chasing me) and ran towards the north.
'I saw Himavan and mount Meru on the north and the northern sea. Still pursued by Vali, I could not know where to go when wise Hanuman spoke to me these words:
'I remembed Matanga's curse to Vali, king of monkeys. Vali would not enter the site of Matanga's hermitage as his head would break into a hundred pieces if he did'. Therefore  we thought it would be safe for us to reside in that place.
'O prince Rama then I reached mount Rishyamuka which Vali did not enter out of fear of the curse of Matanga.
'O king that way I surveyed the entire earth directly and returned to this cave and lived here.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षटचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortysixth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
The leaders of vanara troops went fast in all directions to look for Vaidehi following the instructions of  the king of vanaras.
They went looking everywhere in the tanks, in the bottom of rivers, in towns, in the sky and similarly in inaccessible rivers, mountains, and forts surrounded by rivers.
The troop leaders of the monkeys instructed by Sugriva searched in all places including mountains and forests.
The monkeys used to search for Sita all day determinedly and at night assemble at one place.
The monkeys would search all day and by night reach for rest the branches of the trees that bear fruits in all seasons.
The monkey leaders thus spent a month doing what they did daily and returning disappointed, met the monkey king on mount Prasravana.
Having searched for Sita as instructed by  Sugriva, powerful Vinita returned along with the ministers unable to find Sita.
Then the great monkey hero Satabali came back from the northern direction along with the army after searching in vain for Sita.
Sushena searched for a full month in the western quarter along with the monkeys and returned to report to Sugriva.
Sushena came to Sugriva, seated with Rama at Prasravana mountain, offered salutations and spoke:
'We searched for her in the mountains, in inaccessible forests, in rivers and seas and also the countryside.
'We searched for her in the caves, in places filled with extensive vines and huge bushes and in all places mentioned by you.
'We searched again and again the interior, inaccessible and uneven locations,and killed huge animals. We searched in regions difficult to penetrate.
'O king of monkeys we hope, his exhalted highness, the mighty vanara, son of the Windgod, Hanuman has gone in the direction in which Maithili has been carried off. He alone will find Sita and come back.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyseventh sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
Hanuman, the monkey accompanied by Tara and Angada proceeded as instructed by Sugriva in the (South) direction.
He went a long distance with other heroic monkeys, searching in the impenetrable caves of Vindhya mountain. They combed interior places, mountain peaks, fortresses surrounded by rivers, lakes, extensive groves of trees, bushes and thickets.
The heroic monkeys went searching all over the direction for the daughter of Janaka, but in vain.
The unassailable monkeys ate roots and fruits and halted here and there at different places searching for Sita.
They searched in dense forests, interior locations impassable, desolate and terrific, without water, and people.
Having searched all over in the forests and very difficult areas, the fearless, invincible vanaras moved forward, leaving that place and entered another areasearching.
As they marched forward, they entered a location where there were trees devoid of leaves, flowers and fruits and rivers without water and a place where it was difficult to get roots (for food).
There were no buffaloes, no deer, no elephants, tigers or even  birds and  other wild animals.
There were no medicinal plants, no vines or creepers spreading on the ground.The lotus creepers on the dry ground had shining leaves,beautiful and fragrant blooms devoid of bees.
There was a sage called Kandu who was truthful, outrageous and shorttempered. He observed strict austerities and was rich in penance.
The great sage was enraged because he had lost his sixteenyearold son in the forest.
Cursed by the great righteous sage the entire forest turned barren, unfit to harbour  living beings and became devoid of even beasts and birds.
The monkeys searched in the forest regions, in the mountains, rivers and sources of rivers with concentrated attention.
Eager to please Sugriva, the great souls searched  in the forest region. Even there they   could not find Janaka's daughter and also Ravana who had abducted Sita.
(Then) they noticed a place covered with creepers and bushes. As soon as they entered the dreadful forest, they saw a demon of wicked deeds, unafraid even of gods.
The monkeys beheld the dreadful demon standing firmly like a huge, incomparable mountain in front of them.
Seeing the monkeys, the infuriated demon ran towards them, raising his fist firmly, saying, 'You are all as good as dead, now that I have caught you.'
Mistaking him for Ravana, Angada, Vali's son at once pounced on him and slapped him with his palm.
Struck by Vali's son, the demon vomitting blood from the mouth, fell down on the ground like a mountain, uprooted.
He breathed his last, and the monkeys who won went searching almost all over the mountain caves.
Again they searched the forest and  entered another dreadful mountain cave.
Wise Angada, exhausted after the search, collected the monkeys, and consoling them, said slowly:
'We have searched here, there, everywhere, in dense forests, hills, forts, impenetrable caverns and mountain ranges. But we could find neither Janaki who is like a goddess nor the demon who abducted her.
'You should keep searching on till we see Sita, Janaka's daughter, giving up laziness and sorrow and sleep that is overpowering us.
'It is said, zeal, capability, and fortitude can overcome defeat and lead to success. Therefore I am saying this.
'Search this impenetrable forest even now, O you denizens of this forest Give up grief, let us all once again ransack this forest.
'Sugriva, the monkey king, is wrathful and awards severe punishment. We should ever bear in mind the (purpose of the) great self, Rama.
'I have said all this for your good. You may carry it out, if it pleases you. Speak freely if there is any other course left for all of us, O monkeys'
Having heard Angada, Gandhamadana worn out by thirst and exhaustion, replied in a feeble tone:
'What Angada says is appropriate, beneficial and also favourable. Carry out his command.
'Once again let us explore the mountains, caverns, forests, desolate places and mountain streams.
Once again the  monkeys rose up and started exploring the mountain ranges of Vindhya and the forests surrounding the southern side.
Eager to find Sita, the best of monkeys climbed the silver mountain rich with peaks and caverns resembling the autumnal clouds. And looked out into the Lodhra grove and the garden of seven leaves (banara plantations).
Even after scaling up the peak, the exhausted, heroic monkeys could not find Vaidehi, the dear queen of Rama.
Having looked all over the mountain and many caverns, those monkeys got down from the mountain.
Descending to the foothills, the exhausted monkeys became quiet. Fatigued and disheartened, they assembled under a tree, stood for a moment and then lay down.
Resting for a while, the frustrated monkeys resumed their search throughout the southern direction.
The bulls among vanaras and Hanuman, the chief of the group again started exploring  everywhere in the Vindhya range starting from the beginning.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyninth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
Hanuman, together with the monkeys, Tara and Angada, searched in the impenetrable places and caves of Vindhya.
They also searched near rivers, mountain streams, hill ranges, caves of lions and tigers, in the rock shelters and difficult spots of vast mountains.
They reached the end of the southwest side of the mountain(Vindhya). While they were still there, the time stipulated for them (to find Sita) had slipped.
The son of the Windgod, Hanuman, searched all over the mountains and caves and woods difficult to access in that southwestern region of the mountain.
Having explored the region surrounded by a network of mountains, Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Mainda and also Dvivida, Sushena, Jambavan, Angada the heir apparent, Tara the forestdweller staying close to one another and Hanuman too not far from the others searched in the southern direction. While  they were exploring, they saw the mouth of a large cave called Rikshabilam, which had its mouth open,  guarded by a demon.
Overcome with hunger and thirst, the exhausted monkeys noticed a huge cave covered with creepers and bushes, while they were looking around for water.
Just then, the kraunchas, swans, geese and chakravaka drenched in water with their limbs reddened with the pollen of lotuses were fluttering out (of the cave).
The bulls among the monkeys were bewildered when they reached the cave which was difficult to access.
The brilliant host of monkeys experienced both fear and joy to see the cave difficult to enter.
The cave was crowded with creatures of different kinds. It looked like the abode of the king of demons difficult (to enter), dreadful and impenetrable.
Then Hanuman, son of the Windgod who appeared like a huge mountain and knew about forests spoke to the fellowmonkeys:
'Going round the places covering all mountain ranges in the southern direction, we are spent. But we could not see Maithili.
'From this cave have emerged several birds like sarasas, swans, kraunchas and chakravakas drenched in water. Surely there must be a source of plenty of water or well or a pond. Moreover there are shining( green) trees at the entrance of the cave (suggesting subsoil water).'
On hearing him, the monkeys entered the cave full of darkness. There was no light of the Moon or the Sun. It was a horripilating experience.
The tigers among the monkeys entered the dark cave reverberating with the sounds of lions, beasts and birds.
The monkeys could not fix their eyes anywhere.Their lustre or valour could not help them. They moved like wind uninterrupted and their vision was lost in darkness.
As the elephantlike monkeys entered the cave quickly, they saw bright light and an excellent delightful place.
Holding one another's hands, they went in for a distance of one  yojana inside the cave that was densely covered with several kinds of trees.
Having nearly lost their senses (without water to drink), the thirsty and bewildered monkeys were desperate for water.They wandered in the cave without feeling lazy for some time.
Exhausted and enfeebled, they saw with dejected faces a gleam of light at a time when they were desparate.
Having reached inside the cave the monkeys saw a forest shining like blazing fire, dispelling the surrounding darkness. There they noticed sala, tala, tamala, punnaga, vanjjula, dhava, champaka, and naga trees. They also saw blossoming plants of Karnikara, bunches of beautiful golden flowers and tender redcoloured leaves.They saw wonderful trees with creepers on top entwining them, and ornamented with gold  (like golden fruits), radiant like the dazzling rising Sun. There were altars encrusted with precious sapphire and vaidurya. The golden trees were shining bright. There were lotus creepers looking like sapphire and vaidurya.The ponds were filled with golden lotuses and were surrounded by birds.
There they saw golden fishes and huge tortoises in the pellucid water of the tank filled with lotus creepers.
The vanaras beheld highrise palaces built with gold and silver. The windows fixed on the roof were golden, shaped like cow's eye with lattices of pearls. They also saw best of houses built in gold, silver and clay, decorated with precious gems including vaidurya.
They saw trees bright like corals in full bloom and ripe fruits. Golden bees were found hovering around making all kinds of honey.
They saw all over rich collections of beds, couches and highly valuable vehicles,  decorated beautifully with gems and gold.They also saw a large collection of shining utensils made of gold, silver and bronze.
There they noticed a wonderful collection of incense and sandal, tasty and pure eatables, roots and fruits
(They found) excellent drinks and many kinds of honey, wonderful collections of clothes, colourful blankets and heaps of animal skin.
The monkeys marked here and there a collection of gold, glittering like blazing fire.
While searching here and there in the cave, the strong and powerful monkeys discovered a woman not far from there.
She was an ascetic in bark robes and deer skin blazing with lustre, restrained in her food. The monkeys got very frightened.
The amazed monkeys stopped there. Hanuman enquired, 'Who are you? Whose cave is this'?
Then Hanuman who was of the size of a mountain greeted the old lady with folded hands and enquired her 'Who are you? To whom does this mansion, this cave and these gems belong?'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends of fiftieth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic of the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
On meeting the distinguished, righteous ascetic woman robed in deer skin, Hanuman said:
'We are exhausted with thirst and hunger. We are fatigued. (Hence) we entered this dark cave all at once(without waiting for permission).
'Thirst drove us into this cave on earth. We are amazed at the kind of many wonderful objects here and have nearly lost our senses. We are tormented with pain.
'To whom do these golden trees resembling the rising Sun belong? For whom are these  tasty roots and fruits? Whose are these manystoreyed golden houses with glittering windows adorned with silver lattices encrusted with gems?
'By whose prowess are these golden trees yielding sacred fragrant flowers and fruits?  How are these golden lotuses created in the clear water? How is it that here are golden fishes and tortoises? Whose fruit of penance is this? Is it by your power? We do not know. You should tell all of us everything'.
The noble ascetic committed to the welfare of all beings replied to Hanuman's enquiry:
'O bull among monkeys this golden forest was created by the magical power of a deceitful demon called Maya.
This best of wonderful mansions has been constructed earlier by Visvakarma, the chief (architect) of the demons.
'He (Maya) performed rigorous penance in the dense forest for thousands of years seeking the favour of Brahma, the creator and obtained a boon that he should inherit all the wealth of Usanas (Shukra).
Then the mighty Maya who received the power of (executing) desires created this mansion and lived here happily for some time in this dense forest.
'Seeing this great demon in love with a heavenly apsara (nymph) called Hema, Lord Indra with all his might attacked him with his thunderbolt.
'Thus this wonderful forest and the golden house with all luxury were given away permanently to Hema by the creator Brahma.
'O best of monkeys daughter of Meru Sauvarni, I am Svayamprabha (selfilluminator), caretaker of this house of Hema. (Meru Sauvarni is the eleventh  Manu).
'Hema, wellversed in dance and music is a fast friend to me. She granted a boon (that none can resist me) and gave this house of which I am the caretaker.
'What is your mission? For what purpose have you come to this inaccessible forest? What are you looking for?How did you find this?
'Eat these wonderful roots and fruits and have these drinks and then tell me all about you.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकपञ्चशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends of the fiftyfirst sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
After the monkey leaders had taken rest, the noble ascetic with undiverted attention said these words:
'O monkeys if you have been relieved of your fatigue after eating fruits, now tell me about yourself, if you think it can be told. I want to hear.
When Hanuman, son of the Windgod, heard her, he started narrating frankly and truthfully.
'Rama, son of Dasaratha, a prosperous king of all the worlds, comparable to Indra and Varuna came to the Dandaka forest along with his brother Laksmana and wife Vaidehi. Ravana abducted his wife from Janasthana.
'We along with the dreadful monkeys are sent with Angada as our chief to the southern direction, guarded by Yama and inhabited by sage Agasti. We are commanded to search Sita, princess of Videha and also the abode of the demon Ravana who assumes any form at his free will.
'We were all exhausted, lost in thought and worried, unable to cross this deep ocean of sorrow. We did not know how to proceed.
'Then while we were looking around we saw this cave concealed by trees and vines, with darkness spread all over.
'Drenched in water the swans, kuraras, and sarasas were seen emerging with water dripping from thier wings.
'I suggested to the fellowmonkeys to enter this cave, inferring that there would be water and all of them came to the same conclusion.
'We said, 'let us enter', since we were in a hurry to carry out our king's orders.Then we jumped in, holding one another's hand.
'Vexed and starved, we entered this grotto shrouded in darkness.This is our task and we reached here (in the process).
'You have given us roots and fruits out of hospitality and we have been taken them driven by hunger and thirst.
'We were dying from hunger when you saved us. Tell us what the monkeys can do to repay your debt?'.
To the leaders among the monkeys, knowers of dharma, who said this Svayamprabha replied:
'I am very much pleased with all of you, smart monkeys. As I am engaged in the practice of righteousness, I do not need your services.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्विपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftysecond sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
To the auspicious words of the righteous, blameless hermitess Hanuman replied:
'You are a righteous lady. You have given us refuge. Now in moving about the cave we have exceeded the time limit given by Sugriva.'
'O righteous lady we have a great task waiting. We are afraid of Sugriva as we could not accomplish our objective by staying here. Save us.'
To the words of Hanuman the ascetic replied, 'I consider it difficult for any one who enters here to go back alive.'
'I will help all monkeys out of this cave by virtue of my power of asceticism duly practised.
Happy at the prospect of getting out (of the cave) they all not only closed their eyes but also covered them with their delicate fingers.
Then the great monkeys, faces covered with their hands, emerged from the cave in a moment.
The righteous hermitess released all the monkeys out of that difficult situation and said these words of consolation:
'This Vindhya mountain has a rich collection of trees and bushes. This is Prasravana hill and this is the great ocean.O monkeys. Good luck to you. (Now) I am going back home'. Having said so, Svayamprabha entered the splendid cave.
Then the monkeys saw the boundless, dreary ocean roaring wild with its terrific waves spread all over.
While they were ransacking the impassable mountain created with the magical powers of Maya, the time limit of one month set by the king was over.
Then the highsoul monkeys reached the hill adjacent to Vindhya mountain on which trees were in full bloom.They sat there, lost in thought.
Alarmed at the thought (of transgression of time limit), the monkeys kept looking at the tree tops entwined with a hundred oreepers heavily loaded with the flowers of spring.
Having realised (looking at the flowers) that spring has set in and they have exceeded the time limit, they all fell down on the ground.
Coming to a conclusion after due deliberation Angada, heir apparent, profoundly wise, endowed with sturdy and broad shoulders like those of a lion or a bull, spoke in a sweet voice to the elderly, respectable monkeys, dwellers of the forest:
'O monkeys don't you realize that all of us have come here at the command of the monkey king, and while we were in the cave a whole month has gone by?
'We started our journey in the month of Ashvayuja with a certain time limit. That has exceeded. What is the future course of action?
'You are all celebrated for bravery and incomparable in your activities. You have followed me in obedience to the orders of the tawnyeyed Sugriva.
'We should be killed since we have failed to achieve the objective (of finding Sita). There is no doubt about it. Who can live in peace without executing the orders of the king?
'Now that the time limit fixed by Sugriva has expired, the right thing to do for the monkeys is to fast unto death.
'By nature Sugriva is harsh, and being a king now, he will not forgive us who are real offenders and have not done the task assigned.
'Surely the king will torture us by awarding death sentence in a singular manner when we go back. It is better for us to meet death here itself.
'I was not installed as heir apparent by Sugriva. I was made crowned prince by king Rama, the king of the people who never hurts others.
'The Monkeyking nursed bitter enmity against me even earlier. Now seeing my lapse, he will decidedly inflict severe punishment on me.
'I do not want my friends to see my calamity, my death. I shall sit here on the sacred shores of this ocean and await my death'.
Hearing the young heir apparent thus speaking, the best of the monkeys kindly responded:
'By nature Sugriva is harsh. Rama is devoted to his wife. Therefore, if Sugriva sees that we have not found Vaidehi and have returned (without fulfilling the mission) he will award death sentence to us in order to please Rama.There is no doubt.
'Those who have failed in their mission, being offenders should not go to meet the king. Offenders are not forgiven. Here itself we will search for Sita and if we are able to know her whereabouts we will go back. Or else we will go to the abode of Yama'.
'On hearing the words of the frightened monkeys, Tara said, 'Enough of this sorrow. If it pleases you, we will all go to the cave and reside there' ''
'This cave built by magic is inaccessible. It has a number of trees, water, eatables and drinks. (If we live here) we need not be afraid of even Indra, the breaker of enemy citadels or even of Rama or also of the king of monkeys'.
All the monkeys agreed to the favourable suggestion of Tara which was acceptable to Angada. 'A plan may be made in such a way by which we will not be killed by the king. Our strategy should be delinked from the conditions laid down by the king. Let us not face punishment' said the monkeys.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रिपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftythird sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
Hanuman listened to the proposal of Tara, whose face was like the Moon, lord of the stars. (After listening to Tara) he thought Angada might take over the kingdom from Sugriva.
Hanuman thought Vali's son possessed in addition to his intellect, eight kinds of limbs, four kinds of strength and fourteen qualities (required of a king):
Hanuman proceeded to win over Angada, who was ever shining in strength and valour, who was growing in majesty constantly like the Moon in the bright fornight, whose intellectual prowess was equal to that of Brhaspati, who was equal to his father in valour and who was wellversed in all sastras. Angada was listening toTara like Indra listened to Sukra (preceptor of the demons).
Resorting to the third strategy out of the four ways of achieving an objective Hanuman created differences among the monkeys with skilful arguments. (Sama, Dana, Bheda and Danda are the four means. Hanuman adopted Bheda as a means of winning over an enemy).
When there were differences among the monkeys over the issue, Hanuman intimidated Angada with frightening words expressing his anger, using skilful arguments:
'O Son of Tara you are, indeed, very efficient like your father in combat. You can hold firmly the responsibilty of the vanara kingdom like your father.
'O leader among  monkeys Vanaras are always fickleminded. Being away from their sons and wives they will not always carry out your command and stay here forever.
'This  I am telling you openly and frankly. These monkeys are not going to be obedient to you. Neither Jambavan, nor Nila nor the great monkey Suhotra nor even myself would subscribe to this opinion (of staying in the cave) and follow you. It is not possible for you to keep us or these monkeys from Sugriva through the policy of appeasement like Sama, Dana, Bheda or even Danda (persuasion, giving gifts, creating differences or imposing punishment).
'It is said that when a strong man fights a weak one, the weak opponent should adopt the strategy of asana (watching) for selfprotection. The weak should not enter into combat with the strong.
'You may think it safe to stay here in this opening of the earth. It is a petty task for the arrows of Lakshmana to break open this socalled cave.
'In the past Indra had done a small damage (to the cave) with his thunderbolt. But with his sharp arrows Lakshmana will shatter the cave easily as though it is a leaf cup.
'Lakshmna has many such iron arrows that are equal to the thunderbolt. They can even split the mountains.
'O scorcher of enemies the moment you decide to establish yourself here, all these monkeys will surely desert you.
'The memory of their sons and wives will haunt these hungry monkeys. The inconvenient bed will make them so depressed that they will leave you behind.
'Left out of your friends and relatives,who are your wellwishers, you will be very frightened even by the trembling of a blade of grass.
In Progress
'It is not that Lakshmana's dreadful arrows flying at great speed will not torture you. It will be difficult for you to avert them as they are eager to kill an escaping enemy.
'If along with us you approach Sugriva in a humble manner he will make you his successor to the kingdom.
'Your father's brother is virtuous, wellintentioned, loving, steadfast in action, and true to his promise. He will not kill you.
On hearing Hanuman's humble words (of advice) consistent with righteousness and full of devotion to his master, the king, Angada said:
'Sugriva has no steadfastness, purity of body and mind, compassion, rectitude, valour and patience.
'He usurped his elder brother's queen, while he was still alive. It is morally abominable since an elder brother's wife is like a mother. How can a person who blocks the entrance of a cave while his noble brother is engaged in fighting inside be treated as righteous?
'Illustrious Rama, who faithfully held his hand was forgotten after he received his help. Indeed whose help would he remember?
'Sugriva ordered search for Sita out of fear of Lakshmana and not out of fear of unrighteousness. How can such a man be pious?
'He is a sinner and an ungrateful person as he does not remember others' help. He is fickleminded. Which respectable person will believe him? Which member of his family will wish to live?
'If I am the king's son, virtuous or otherwise, I will be installed in the kingdom (as successor). How can Sugriva suffer me to live when I am his enemy's descendant?
'My alternate strategy has failed. I have already made a mistake (by announcing my plan). My advisors are holding different views. I am powerless. How can a weakling, an orphan like me live in Kishkinda?
'Sugriva is deceitful, cruel and treacherous. He will inflict secret punishment on me by way of imprisonment for the sake of the kingdom.
'It is better for me to fast unto death rather than suffer imprisonment. Permit me to do so. You may all go back.
'I swear I will not return to the city. I will fast unto death here only. Death for me is desirable.
'Convey my greetings with due courtesy to Rama and Lakshmana on my behalf and my respects to my father's younger brother, king of monkeys, Sugriva and wish him well.
'You should convey my mother as well as Ruma my good wishes for their health and wellbeing. You should console my mother Tara also.
'By nature my mother, is compassionate. She is fond of me. (But) she is helpless. On hearing about my death, she will certainly give up her life'.
Having expresed so much of his feelings, disheartened Angada saluted the elderly monkeys and started crying. Then he spread the darbha grass and lay down on the ground.
Seeing him lie down the bulls among the monkeys became sad and shed hot tears from their eyes.
Blaming Sugriva and praising Vali, all the companions of Angada sat there surrounding him after having decided to fast unto death .
With the opinion of Vali's son ascertained, all the great monkeys thought it proper to die. They sipped water and assembled on the northern shore of the sea facing the east with the darbha grass spread on the ground, their edges pointing southward.
Overtaken by the fear of death, the monkeys kept talking about Rama's exile into the forest, Dasaratha's death, destruction of demons in Janasthana, the death of Jatayu, abduction of Sita, Vali's death and Rama's anger.
While the numerous monkeys, resembling peaks of high mountains were roaring, it resounded through the mountain caves. It was like the sound of the  stormy thunderclouds.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfifth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
While the monkeys were preparing to fast unto death on the plateau of the mountain, Sampati, the prosperous king of vultures, the longlived elder brother of Jatayu widely known for his strength, appeared there.
Coming out of the cave of the great mount Vindhya, Sampati was glad to see the monkeys seated there and said to himself:
'Destiny rules the world of men in accordance with a divine arrangement. Or else, it would not have brought me food after a long time (of fasting)'. (The monkeys are food for Sampati)'
Looking at them, the vulture continued, 'I will eat these monkeys one after the other as and when they die'.
Hearing the words of the vulture greedily waiting for food, deeply dejected Angada spoke to Hanuman:
'See, Yama, son of Vaivasvata, has arrived here in person  to destroy the monkeys in the name of Sita. (Sita became the direct agent for causing the destruction of monkeys).
'Rama's task has not been performed. Sugriva's order has not been excuted. And (now) suddenly this calamity has overtaken the monkeys unawares.
'We have heard in detail about the task accomplished by Jatayu, the king of vultures, in order to please Sita, the princess of Videha.
'Bound by  friendship and compassion each one helps the other. In fact, Jatayu did this by giving up his life on his own, for the sake of Rama.
'Jatayu, the knower of dharma, has laid down his life for the wellbeing of Rama. We are exhausted in the process of helping Rama. We have lost hope of our lives after entering these forests. Yet we have failed to find the princess from Mithila.
'The king of vultures was slain by Ravana in a combat. He attained supreme status. He had no fear for Sugriva (as we have).
'The survival of monkeys has become doubtful due to the death of Jatayu, death of  king Dasaratha and the abduction of the princess from Videha.
'The exile of Rama and Lakshmana into the forest along with Sita, so also the death of Vali and of the demons in the hands of Rama due to his anger are all evil consequences of a boon granted to Kaikeyi.'
The wise king of vultures was shaken up mentally on seeing the monkeys lying on the ground and hearing the unhappy narration of Angada. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आतिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षटपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the  fiftysixth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
On hearing the words that came from Angada's mouth, the sharpbeaked, loudvoiced vulture (Sampati) said:
'Who is it that was Pronouncing loudly the death of my dearest brother Jatayu? This news has shaken my mind.
'I heard my brother's name today after a long time.I wish to know how the demon and the vulture fought at Janasthana.
'I wish to be brought down from this inaccessible mountain peak by all of you. I am glad to have heard from you the name of my younger brother after a long time. He is virtuous, valiant and praiseworthy.
'O bulls among monkeys I desire to hear about the death of my brother Jatayu, who was dwelling at Janasthana.
'How did Dasaratha develop friendship with my brother? I hear that Rama who is the favourite firstborn of Dasaratha has endeared himself to all elders.
'O tamers of foes as my wings are burnt down by the Sun's rays it is not possible for me to move forward. I wish you help me to get down from this mountain'.
The leaders among monkeys did not trust his words even though his voice was choked with grief. They suspected his intentions.
On seeing the vulture, the monkeys fasting unto death got a terrible thought in their minds that the vulture might eat them.
'Since we wish to die, we will be accomplishing our objective successfully if he eats us soon'.
Thus thought the chief among the monkeys. Angada having helped the vulture come down the mountain peak, said:
'O powerful bird my revered grandfather Riksharaja was a glorious king of monkeys. He had two sons called Sugriva and Vali.Both were strong like floodwaters. My father Vali was wellknown in this world for his remarkable deeds.
'The great warrior Rama is the son of Dasaratha, the scion of the Ikshvaku race and the king of the entire world. He entered Dandaka forest along with his brother Lakshmana and consort Vaidehi obeying his father's command following a righteous path.
'His wife was abducted from Janasthana by Ravana. The king of vultures Jatayu, a friend of Rama's father observed princess of Videha, being forcibly carried away through the aerial region.
'Jatayu destroyed Ravana's aerial chariot and put Maithili in a (safe) place. But being old and exhausted, he was killed in a combat by Ravana.
'Thus the vulture was slain by Ravana who was stronger. Cremated by Rama and his last rites performed, he reached the supreme heavenly abode. (It was the luck of Jatayu, unlike Dasaratha, to be cremated by Rama.)
'Then Rama made friendship with my father's brother, great self Sugriva and killed my father.
On hearing the pathetic words from the monkeys who had given up hope of life, the loudvoiced vulture wailing replied:
'O monkeys, the one you said to have been killed by mighty Ravana in a combat was  my younger brother, Jatayu.
'Even after I have heard this, I cannot avenge my brother's death as I am old, I have no wings, and I have no energy enough (to fight).
'In olden days, when Indra killed Vrutra we (Jatayu and I) seeking to challenge him reached the Sun blazing with a garland of beams.
'Flying in the sky at a violently high speed, we reached the meridian of the Sun when, unable to bear the heat, Jatayu became weak.
'Seeing my brother tormented due to the Sun's radiance I was overwhelmed with grief. Out of love I covered him with both my wings.
'O bulls among monkeys, consequently my wings were burnt and I dropped down on Vindhya. Here I have been living, knowing not my brother's whereabouts.'
To these words of Jatayu's brother, Sampati, Angada, the learned heir apparent replied:
'I have heard you. If you are the brother of Jatayu, tell us about the abode of that demon if you know.
'Tell us about Ravana, king of the demons who is unaware of the consequences. If you know his residence, tell us if it is near or far.'
Then Jatayu's elder brother, the glorious Sampati, said these pleasing, befitting words:
'O monkeys I am a vulture. My wings are burnt and my strength is depleted. The only substantial help I can render Rama is through my words.
'I know Varuna's worlds(seas and oceans) and all the three worlds measured by three  strides  by Vamana. Indeed I also know about the friction between the great gods and demons and the churning of the ocean for nectar.
'Rama's work is my primary duty. (But) my strength is drained by age and I have lost my vitality.
'I saw a young lady of beautiful appearance, adorned with all kinds of ornaments  borne away by the evilminded Ravana. That dainty lady was calling out, 'O Rama,  O Lakshmana' and was crying aloud. She was throwing away her ornaments and was wriggling to get out of Ravana's grip.
'Her fine silk garment was shining like the radiance of the Sun on the mountain peak, like lightning against the dark cloud. (That was Ravana).
'Since she was uttering Rama's name I think she is Sita. (Now) I will tell you about the demon's abode. Listen
'He is Vishrava's son and halfbrother of Vaishravana. His name is Ravana and he resides in the city of Lanka.
'The beautiful city of Lanka is an island, a hundred yojanas away from here.It was built by Visvakarma.
'The city has golden gates, golden platforms, huge, goldencoloured, uniformly built mansions surrounded by a tall boundary wall of the colour of sunlight.
'You will see in the city of Lanka, the princess from Videha, daughter of Janaka, a picture of dejection, robed in silk, confined in the harem of Ravana, wellprotected by demonesses.
'O monkeys traverse a hundred yojanas across the sea. On reaching the southern coast you will be able to see Ravana's Lanka defended and surrounded by the sea. Now proceed swiftly and prove your strength.
'By intuition I know you would see Sita and return. On the first plane you will see sparrows and birds which live on grain. On the second, you will see crows living on the food offered to the dead and birds living on the fruits of trees, and then cocks, cranes and kraunchas moving on the third plane, on the fourth, hawks and falcons and on the fifth, vultures.
'O bulls among monkeys swans blessed with strength, vigour,  beauty and youth move in the sixth region. Beyond, on the seventh plane, you will see the descendants of Garuda.
'From here I see Ravana and Janaki. We (vultures) have a divine golden vision and great power.
'O monkeys therefore, by the strength of food and by nature we can always see beyond a hundred yojanas from this edge.
'Our movement and vision naturally extends to distant places. For those fighting on foot, the movement is restricted to the extent of foot movement.
'Look out for some means to cross the salty ocean. You will see Vaidehi, and return, your mission accomplished.
'Take me to the ocean, the abode of Varuna. I intend to offer oblation to my brother, a great soul who is in heaven.'
Th mightiest of monkeys carried Sampati, whose wings were totally burnt, to the sea shore and after he had offered oblations took him back to the same place. Having obtained all information from the king of vultures the monkeys were very happy.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे अष्टपञ्चशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyeighth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
The mighty monkeys were delighted to hear the nectarlike words of the king of vultures.
Jambavan the king of bears got up at once from the ground along with the monkeys and spoke to the king of vultures:
'Where is Sita now? By whom else was she seen while being carried? Pray, tell us everything. You are the ultimate saviour of monkeys.
'Who is not aware of Rama's swift arrows which are like thunderbolt? Who is not able to assess the speed and power of arrows of Lakshmana released directly?'
Pleased to see the happiness and eagernes of the monkeys assembled to hear about Sita, Sampati continued in order to reassure them:
'Now hear by whom I was informed about the abduction of the largeeyed princess from Videha and where she is at present.
'With my vitality and prowess depleted, I have been staying for a long time on this mountain, extended by several yojanas and inaccessible.
'Reduced to this state, I have been maintained by food given in time by my son named Suparshva, best among birds.
'Gandharvas have intense passion. Serpents show violent anger. Deer have great fear. And we vultures have great hunger.
'Once my son came to me without meat after sunset while I was feeling hungry for food.
'I was thinking, tormented with hunger, my son who always keeps me happy told me exactly what had happened:
'O dear father I went to get food at the right time and stood blocking the entrance of mount Mahendra.
'There I stood alone  looking down, obstructing the path of thousands of creatures inhabiting the ocean.
'I saw a person who was dark and huge like a mass of collyrium carrying a lady whose radiance was like the rising Sun.
'Since I was looking for food I resolved to seize both of them. (But) he asked me in a gentle and courteous manner to make way (since I was blocking the aerial path).
'Who will strike polite people? Even the mean do not do it anywhere. And what to speak of me.
'He flew hurriedly with splendour as though he was enveloping the sky (making it small). All the flying creatures in the sky came and greeted me with respect.
'I heard the great sages saying, 'O dear you are lucky to be saved. He has somehow gone from here with that lady (without hurting you). Undoubtedly you are lucky.'
'I was greeted by the most illustrious siddhas. I came to know from them that he was Ravana, the king of demons. I was looking at him while he was abducting Janaka's daughter, who was the wife of Dasaratha's Rama. Her ornaments had dropped and silken robes had slipped since she lost hold on herself. She was crying, loudly calling out the names of Rama and Lakshmana, her hair dishevelled.
'O father this is the cause of my delay', said Suparshva, who knew the value of time.                 Thus he gave the entire account to me.
'Even after hearing this I could not advance (against Ravana). How could I, a vulture without wings, leap even a little?
'Being endowed with the faculty of thinking and speech I shall tell you what is possible for you to execute with your prowess. Listen.
'I will please you with my word and thought and do not doubt that Rama's task is dear to me as well.
'Indeed, you monkeys are very wise, strong and sensitive. The king of monkeys has sent you on this mission. You cannot be conquered even by gods.
'The heronfeathered arrows of Rama and Lakshmana are sharp and strong enough to protect or subdue all the three worlds.
'The tenheaded Ravana is mighty, powerful and strong, indeed. But you are efficient and it will not be difficult for you to achieve this task.
'Do not bother about the time limit. Resolve to achieve the objective, for wise people  like you should not lag behind in accepting challenges.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyninth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
Sampati bathed and offered libations to Jatayu. Then all the monkeys sat round him on the beautiful mountain.
Angada sat near Sampati surrounded by all monkeys. Sampati who had gained confidence spoke to Angada  once again joyously.
'O monkeys I shall tell you in detail how I came to know the princess from Mithila. Listen quietly with rapt attention:
Scorched by the rays of the Sun, I was burnt totally and fell on the peak of this mount Vindhya years ago.
'Then I looked at the oceans, the mountains, rivers, lakes, forests and all locations and  my memory returned gradually.
'I came to know then that this place is inhabited by flocks of happy birds and full of many caves and mountain peaks. This is mount Vindhya on the shore of the southern ocean.
'There was a hermitage nearby, where a revered sage, who was even worshpped by gods  lived. His name was Nishakara. He did rigorous penance here.
'O righteous monkeys after the death of sage Nishakara eight thousand years have passed. And I have been living here.
'I descended down slowly from the high rugged peak of the Vindhya mountain with great difficulty to the plain land bristling with sharp, harsh darbha grass.
'Eager to see the great sage I reached the place with much difficulty. I and my brother Jatayu had  approached him many a time earlier.
'In the vicinity of that hermitage there was no tree without flowers or fruits and fragrant was the breeze that blew around.
'On reaching the sacred hermitage, I stood and waited under a tree for the audience of the divine sage Nishakara.
'He was followed by bears, deer, tigers, lions, elephants and snakes just as living beings follow their creator.
'Just as the army including feudatories recede, when the king comes, all those creatures repaired to their dens when they knew the arrival of the sage at the hermitage.
The sage who entered the hermitage came out again within a moment on seeing me and enquired about me affectionately:
'O gentle one seeing your body devoid of hair I can understood that your wings have been burnt and your body bruised.
'You are the king among vultures equal to wind in speed.I had seen both the brothers earlier and both of you could change your form at will.
'What disease has affected you? Why are your wings dropped down? Who punished you in this way? Tell me.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtieth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
'Then I revealed everything to the sage,including the arrogant, impetuous action of rashly following the Sun (for challenging Indra).
'O revered sage I am exhausted and my senses are depressed. I am ashamed of myself. My body is wounded. Therefore I am not able to reply.
'Deluded by pride, I and my brother Jatayu challenging each other to test our relative strength flew  far into the sky.
'Both of us made a bet on the peak of mount Kailasa in the presence of sages to follow the Sungod until he sets on the western mountain.
'We heard at some places sounds of musical instruments, sounds of Vedic chanting, and many lovely young women dressed in redsinging.
'We flew quickly into the sky and reached the path of the Sun and looked down at the forest which looked like a green lawn.
'The earth filled with lofty mountains appeared as if it is covered with pebbles. Surrounded by rivers meandering, it looked as though it was entwined with threads.
'The mountains of the earth, Himavan and Vindhya and the great Meru looked like huge elephants in a huge pond.
'Much sweat, pain and fear generated in us while we went on and up. This led to terrific confusion and stupor.
'I did not know which the southern direction was or the southeast or the west. It looked as if the world had been consumed by fire and dissolved, as if it was the end of the yuga.
'My mind was disturbed and I turned my attention from the object. Once again I focused my attention (on the Sun) and could see the Sungod with great effort. The Sun appeared to us equal in size to earth.
'Without taking leave of me Jatayu descended down to the earth. Seeing that, I also followed him down quickly from the sky.
'I protected Jatayu with my wings so that he was not burnt. I, however, got burnt miserably and fell down from the aerial region.
'I thought Jatayu had fallen down somewhere at Janasthana, but I fell on Vindhya, wings burnt, in an unconscious state.
'Bereft of my kingdom, my brother and my wings, and having lost my strength I desire to fall down from the mountain top and die.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfirst sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
'When thus I spoke to the venerable sage in that manner roaring very painfully the divine sage replied after reflecting silently for a moment:
'You will get new wings and feathers and also other parts.You will attain vision, life, prowess and strength.
'I have foreseen with the power of my penance that a great task will be done by you. I have also heard about it in the Puranas and came to know of it.
'Indeed in the Ikshvaku family there will be a king named Dasaratha. He will beget a brilliant son named Rama.
'On account of the command of his father, Rama armed with the strength of truth will proceed to the forest with his brother Lakshmana.
'The king of demons, Ravana who is indestructible even by gods and demons will be abducting his wife from Janastahana.
'Immersed in grief, chaste and famed Sita, will not take any food or enjoy pleasures however much she is tempted.
'Knowing that Vaidehi is not eating food(given by Ravana) Indra,the ruler of gods, will offer nectarlike food rare even for gods.
'Having understood that it has been provided by Indra, Sita will take out a large portion of it and pour it on the ground (as an offering to Rama) and say 'I offer it to Rama wherever he is on earth'.
'If my husband and Lakshmana are living or else even if they have attained heaven let this food be enjoyed by them', Sita will say.
'Rama's messenger and other monkeys will be coming to search for the his queen. O Sampati you should narrate this to them.
'It is good for you in all respects to remain here. Where can you go (without wings)? Wait for appropriate time and place. You will recover your wings'.
'I am not enthusiastic about giving you the wings now. Remain here and carry on the work for the welfare of the world.
'(Carry on) the work not only for the princes (Rama and Lakshmana) but also for the brahmins, sages, gods and others who live here.
'I also want to see Rama and Lakshmana. But I do not like to hold on to my life for long. Hence I will give up my body'. The knower of self, the sage (Nishakara) said this to Sampati.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे  द्विषष्टितम स्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtysecond sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
'The sage who was skilful in speech, having  praised me thus and in many other ways,  permitted me to leave and entered his dwelling.
'Having crawled slowly and slowly from the cave and climbed the Vindhya, I have been awaiting your arrival.
'More than a hundred years have passed and all this time I have borne the sage's words in my heart and have waited for the right time and place.
'Nishakara went on his last journey and attained heaven. Since then many sad thoughts have crisscrossed my mind and I am consumed with those thoughts.
'Whenever I intended to die, the words of the sage rang in my mind. The inspiration he gave me to preserve my life removed my agony like the glowing flames of fire that take away darkness.
'I goaded my son with harsh words saying, 'Knowing the valour of the evilminded Ravana, why did you not protect her (Sita)'
'Even after hearing the wailing of Sita, knowing that both (Rama and Lakshmana) are separated from her and considering my friendship with Dasaratha, I felt displeased with my son (as he did not make an attempt to rescue her)'.
Even as he was telling this to the monkeys his wings started appearing in their presence.
He experienced an unparalleled delight seeing wings with red feathers growing on his body, and said to the monkeys:
'By the grace of the most revered soul,sage Nishakara, both my wings that were burnt by the Sun's radiance have grown again.
'The valour, strength and even courage that I had in my youth,I am experiencing now.
Sampati, the foremost of the birds thus spoke to the monkeys and flew up from the mountain's peak keen on finding the aerial path.
The tigers among monkeys felt very happy on hearing the words of Sampati and became sure of their success with their valour.
The monkeys as strong as the wind regained courage and went in search of the daughter of Janaka in the direction of Abhijit (constellation known as Abhijit is associated with success).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रिषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtythird sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
Hearing the words spoken by the king of vultures, the highly courageous monkeys assembled together and leaped with joyscreaming.
On hearing the words of Sampati, the monkeys felt glad and, eager to see Sita, reached the ocean, the passage to the abode of Ravana.
Having reached the ocean, the monkeys, endowed with frightening courage, stood looking at the vast ocean which appeared like an image of the whole world.
Powerful and heroic monkeys assembled at the northern end of the southern ocean.
The ocean was of terrifying form filled with various violent species of grotesque creatures of huge bodies playing in the water. Full of violent tides, it appeared asleep at one place and apparently sporting in another. In some places it was rising as high as a mountain with huge volumes of water. It was as if roaring with the demon chiefs residing in the underworld. The great monkeys were worried seeing the huge ocean which created horripilation in them.
All the monkeys were worried when they suddenly saw the ocean which looked impassable like the sky. They wondered if they can at all accomplish the task (of finding Sita)
Angada, the best among the monkeys saw the worried army despondent gazing at the ocean, and comforted the frightened troops.
Angada,the strong and wise  son of Vali, spoke thus to the tensed vanaras in the right time:
'Do not be despondent. It is the biggest flaw. It destroys a person like an angry serpent killing a young child.
'If one succumbs to despondency while he has to exhibit his valour, his brilliance gets diminished and he does not succeed in his manly pursuits'.
With the night over, Angada joined the older monkeys again and sought their counsel.
The army of monkeys encircled Angada like the army of Maruts surrounding Indra.
Who else other than the son of Vali and Hanuman can resist and pacify the monkeyarmy?
Then the illustrious Angada, subduer of foes took the counsel of elderly monkeys and  the army into confidence and thus addressed them all in meaningful words:
'Now which mighty monkey will cross the ocean? Who will prove Sugriva, subduer of enemies, true to his promise?
'O monkeys which one can leap a hundred yojanas and liberate the monkey leaders from the great fear of Sugriva?
'By whose effort can we be successful and return home happily from here to meet wives and sons?
'By whose grace shall we approach Rama and Lakshmana and even the monkey king Sugriva happily?
'If there is any one among you who is capable of leaping  across the ocean he will be giving all of us the sacred gift of life quickly?'
After hearing Angada, no one spoke a word. The entire army of monkeys became still and motionless.
Angada, the best of the monkeys again addressed them saying, 'you are all mighty, eminent and courageous, born in renowned families and have been honoured again and again(for your actions).
'None of you at any time have faced any obstruction in doing your deeds. You are efficient  in leaping. O bulls among monkeys now speak out, who among you can fly and how far?इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुष्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfourth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
Thereafter, on hearing Angada, all the leaders among the monkeys, Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Mainda, Dvivida, Sushena and Jambavan as well expressed one after  the other their capability for leaping.
Gaja said he can leap ten yojanas and Gavaksha said he can go upto twenty yojanas.
Then Gavaya said to the monkeys 'I can leap thirty yojanas Sarabha said 'I can leap forty yojanas' bright Ghandhamadana said 'I can leap as far as fifty yojanas without any doubt' Mainda said 'I can leap more than sixty yojanas' highly brilliant Dvivida said in turn, 'I can no doubt leap seventy yojanas ' brilliant and best of the monkeys Sushena declared 'I can leap across eighty yojanas'.
When the monkeys were talking (of their individual capacity) in that manner about their speed, Jambavan the oldest of the monkeys inferred (their capacity) and said:
'Earlier I was also very courageous, but now I have become old and reached the fag end of life.
'However  in this situation, it is not possible for us to neglect (our task) as it is the order of the monkeyking and Rama who are determined to achieve the objective.
Jambavan, the distinguished among the monkeys again said, 'My strength to leap into the sky was not only that much (I was stronger in my youth and could cover longer distances)'
'In the past, at the time of the wellknown yagna (of king Bali) I was very strong. I circumambulated the eternal Vishnu while he was taking three strides (in his incarnation of Trivikrama Vamana.)
'Having grown old I do not have the same courage. In my youth my prowess was incomparable and none could excel me.
'I guess that at this time I do not have the capacity to fly to that extent. Achieving the objective is out of question with this much of energy.
'Then the wise Angada said to great Jambavan, in a gentle manner about his  own strength.
'I can  certainly go to a distance of a hundred yojanas. However, I cannot say whether I will have enough capacity to return?
Jambavan who was skilful in speech spoke to that great Angada, 'O leader among monkeys and bears your energy to cover this distance is wellknown to us'.
'You can go upto even a hundred thousand yojanas and have the required energy to return also. But it is not proper to send you (because you are the heir apparent).
'O scorcher of enemies, you are established as the commander of the army and it is proper for us to protect you as we protect our wives.
'O subduer of enemies in acomplishing this task you are the root. O dear therefore you should always be taken care of by us just like the wife looked after.
'The root of any objective should be protected well. This is the basis of an accomplisher. Only when the roots are intact, the trees have the ability to yield flowers and fruits.
'O warrior of proven valour O subduer of enemies in achieving this objective you are the source, being endowed with valour and wisdom.
'O best of monkeys you are the son of my guide (Vali) and respectable. We will be capable of accomplishing the goal only under your protection and guidance.
Jambavan, the wise monkey having said that, Angada, the great son of Vali, replied:
'If I do not go and no other monkey leader goes, then we have to resort to fasting unto death once again.
'If I do not fulfil the objective of the wise king of monkeys I cannot save my life even after returning there (Kishkinda).
'The monkey king has the authority to shower grace or give vent to his anger. If we go without fulfilling the task we will face destruction.
'Therefore, think over well so that we do not fail ultimately. You have a vision.You should suggest means by which this mission does not misfire.'
On listening to Angada's words, Jambavan, the  bull among monkeys, replied this way:
'O hero this work will not be balked. I will now inspire one who can achieve this task.'
Then Jambavan observed the worries of several hundred thousands of the monkey army and said to Hanuman:
'O Hanuman you are the choicest one among many scholars wellversed in all sastras. Why do you sit alone? Why do you not speak?
'Hanuman you are equal to the king of monkeys and also Rama and Lakshmana in brilliance and strength.
'You are the son of Arishtanemi (sage Kasyapa) and Vinata, and your gurulike (elder brother) is Garuda, the greatest among birds. He is powerful and and famous.
'Garuda is very powerful, swift, and famous. I have seen him snatching serpents from the ocean many times.
'The strength of your shoulders is equal to that of his (Garuda's) wings. Your speed and valour are no less.
'O leader of the monkeys you are superior in strength, wisdom, brilliance and valour to all beings. Why do you not realise your own strength?
'O dear she was famous in the three worlds, peerless in beauty and could change form at her free will. She was born of a monkey on this land by dint of a curse.
'She was the daughter of a great king of monkeys called Kunjara. That young and beautiful lady had assumed a lustrous human form decked with wonderful garlands, ornaments and silk clothes and was roving on top of the mountain which appeared like a proud raincloud.
'While the largeeyed lady was stationed on the mountain top, the Windgod gently let her auspicious yellow garment with red border fly away.
'Then he (Windgod) saw her curved, wellset thighs, her beautiful plump breasts and her lovely pleasing face.
'On seeing the broad hips, slender waist and beautiful limbs of that famous lady the Windgod was infatuated.
'The Windgod lost his control over himself. His whole being was overpowered by love for her beautiful, flawless body. He embraced her with his long arms.
'She was bewildered by this and being chaste and strict observer of chastiny she said, 'Who is it that has destroyed my monoandry?
'On hearing Anjana's words, the Windgod replied, ' O auspicious lady, I do you no harm, O lady of beautiful hips. I reached (enjoyed) you in mind, not body. You need not fear.'
'O renowned lady I have embraced you and united with you mentally (enjoyed you without physical contact).You will bring forth a son endowed with great wisdom and courage.
'He will be very powerful, illustrious and will be of great valour and strength. He will be my equal in leaping and flying'.
'O great monkey O strongshouldered one having been assured that way, your mother was pleased and delivered you, a bull among monkeys, in a cave.
'On seeing the rising Sun in the deep forest, mistaking him to be a fruit, you wanted to seize it, when you were young.You suddenly flew into the sky and went flying towards the Sun.
'O great monkey you went three hundred yojanas and were pushed back by the  Sun's radiance. Yet it did not leave you depressed.
'O great monkey while falling fast in space, wise Indra hurled his thunderbolt quickly at you, in anger.
'You fell on the edge of the mountain peak and your left chin  got broken. Since then you are widely known as Hanuman (one who has a wounded chin).
The Windgod who is a carrier of fragrance and breaker of trees became very angry on seeing (the injury on) you and stopped blowing in the three worlds.
'O dear when the Windgod was pleased, Brahma gave a boon to you, to appease his anger. The boon made you truly valiant so that you cannot be struck by any weapon and killed.
'O lord observing that you are not hurt even when struck by the thunderbolt, Indra offered, one of the best boons to you, to choose to die only when you wish.
'You are a son of Kesari endowed with terrific strength and a lawful son of Maruta also. You are, therefore, equal to the very Windgod in flying and in brilliance.
'Now we have almost lost our life.You are our saviour like another monkeyking (like Garuda, king of birds).You are fully endowed with valour and courage.
'O dear when Visnu (Vamana incarnate) took three strides I circumambulated the whole earth including its mountains and trees twentyone times.
'Then on receiving orders from the gods, we collected medicinal herbs and nectar which gave us great strength.
'I have become old and my valour is depleted. At this time you are the sole resort for us. You have all the necessary qualities.
'Cheer up and advance.You are the best among the creatures that can leap.The entire army of monkeys want to see your valour.
'O Hanuman, tiger among monkeys, rise up and cross this great ocean.You have that supreme capacity among all beings.
'O Hanuman All the monkeys look dejected. Why do you delay? O warrior, act quick with your rapid speed like Trivikrama who took three strides that covered the entire universe'.
'In order to cross a hundred yojanas, Hanuman, the best of monkeys expanded his  might and strength. Seeing him, a warrior of great strength, all the monkeys, filled with enthusiasm at once gave up grief and collected together.They rejoiced and propitiated him screaming aloud.
The monkeys collected together happily, gazing at Hanuman.They were wonderstruck to see Hanuman in that huge form, just as all beings were when they saw Lord Narayana in his incarnation of Vamana.
The monkeys praised the mighty Hanuman as he grew in size whirling his tail around joyfully.
As Hanuman was being praised by the monkey leaders, his body filled with lustre. It looked excellent.
Just as a lion grown in a mountain cave stretches its body, the Windgod's son stretched  (his limbs) at that time.
On expansion, wise Hanuman's face was bright, glowing like a burning oven and  shining like smokeless fire.
Hanuman risen from the midst of the monkeys with his hair bristling on the body (due to expansion of body), saluted reverentially to the elderly monkey Jambavan and said :
'The Windgod is a friend of fire who is a powerful consumer of oblations. His strength is immeasurable. He wanders in the sky and shatters the mountain tops.
'I am the lawfulson of the swiftmoving Windgod, Maruta, comparable to him in leaping.
'I can with all enthusiasm go round the vast mount Meru a thousand times without resting on it which is as though scratching the sky.
'I can submerge this world including its mountains rivers and lakes. I can push back the sea waters quickly with my arms.
'Thrust by my thighs,the ocean will rise up, carrying with it the shanks and  mighty crocodiles stunned by the force.
'I am capable of circumambulating a thousand times the great Garuda who consumes snakes and flies in the sky, the abode of birds.
'O bull among monkeys when the Sun rises from behind the eastern mountain it is possible for me to start with him and go to the western horizon and return before the blazing Sun with its beams of light sets. It is also possible for me to descend to  the earth with the same speed and return to the Sun without touching the earth.
'If I rise up, I can overtake all those creatures flying in the sky and from there I can stir up the ocean and tear up the earth easily.
'O monkeys when I leap, I can crush the mountains into powder and pull the vast ocean with me with the force of my thighs.
And then as I leap through the sky flowers of many kinds of creepers and trees will follow me.
'O monkey when I fly upward in the dreadful sky or descend down, all creatures will see me, for my path will be the path of the constellation of Swati (a group of stars).
'O monkeys when I fly in the sky like the great mount Meru, you will see me as if I am swallowing the sky because I will be enveloping it with my strides.
'Only Garuda and Maruta have the capacity to fly like me. No one other than the king of vultures and the Windgod have the speed to fly like me.
'Just as the lightning generated by the clouds lands at once flying in the sky without any support I can also land in less than a moment.
'O monkeys I have a feeling in my mind that I will see Vaidehi. Be happy.
'I am equal to Maruta and Garuda in speed. I feel I can cover ten thousand yojanas (at a stretch).
'I think I can encounter Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt and obtain nectar from his hands. I can even confront Brahma, the selfborn creator courageously. I can even uproot Lanka and carry it.'
The monkeys looked at him and were amazed, happy to see him roaring and shining in brilliance.
Jambavan, the finest of the monkeys, felt very glad on hearing his words which put an end to the sorrow of the kith and kin and said:
'O son of Kesari O son of Maruta O hero you have removed the great grief of your race, dear
'By the blessings of the sages and by the grace of the elderly monkeys may you cross over the vast ocean.
Then the tiger among monkeys, Hanuman said to those forestdwellers (monkeys), 'The earth cannot bear the thrust of my leaping.
'The rocks on the peaks of the ranges of mount Mahendra cannot with stand it, although they are huge and firm.
'I will pick up speed on the peaks of mount Mahendra filled with different kinds of trees and minerals.
'O great monkeys these mountain peaks can withstand the crushing force of my feet as I leap over a hundred yojanas.
The son of Maruta, who was as eminent as the Windgod, the crusher of enemies ascended the great mountain Mahendra, full of grassland inhabited by deer, thickly grown with various trees and creepers full of fragrant flowers and fruits, where roam lions and tigers and proud elephants, a place that echoes with sounds of intoxicated birds and waterfalls.
The mighty, preeminent monkey who was equal to Indra in valour took a leap from the high peaks of the tall mountain, Mahendra৷৷
Crushed by the feet of the great self, Hanuman, the huge mountain looked like a proud elephant struck by a lion.
The rocks of the mountain got scattered by the force. The deer and elephants were terrified. The trees were shaken up violently and streams of water gushed forth.
Shaken by the rude shock, couples of intoxicated gandharvas left in a huff the vast slopes of the great mountain. Flocks of birds and groups of vidyadharas flew away. The serpents went into hiding. Rocks fell off the shaken mountain.
The serpents with their bodies half protruded out of the rocks and hissing looked like flags planted on the mountain.
The alarmed and agitated sages abandonned the mountain peaks.The mountain appeared like a lone traveller separated from the caravan in the great forest.
Magnanimous, wise and heroic Hanuman, destroyer of enemy warriors, fixed his attention on speed, betook himself mentally to Lanka (ere he reached it physically). इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामाणये वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyseventh sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
