Hanuman, crusher of enemies resolved to find the whereabouts of Sita, carried away by Ravana. He followed the path of the Charanas, celestial bards.
Hanuman who raised his head and neck, intending to cross the formidable ocean which none else could accomplish, looked like a leading bull.
Tawnyhued Hanuman, gifted with extraordinary strength and patience happily strolled on the marshy tracts of grassy land which had the colour of vaidurya.
Wise Hanuman went about like a lion scaring away birds, uprooting trees with his chest, and trampling many animals.
The mountain was as though decorated with mineral rocks of varied colours like blue, red, yellow and green as well as black and white৷৷It was frequently visited  by yakshas, kinneras, gandharvas and nagas surrounded by their retinue, capable of assuming any form at their free will rivalling gods and nagas in splendour.
As the monkey leader stood at the foot of the great mountain filled with lordly elephants he looked like an elephant standing at the centre of a pond.
Offering salutations with folded palms to the Sungod, to Mahendra, lord of the gods, to the windgod, to the Creator Brahma and to all the attendants of lord Siva, made up his mind to proceed (to Lanka).
Hanuman, endowed with great equanimity, facing the east and joining his palms by way of salutaion to the Windgod, his father, he enlarged his size  and turned south in order to depart.
Having made up his mind to leap for the cause of Rama, Hanuman began to grow in size just as the sea grows during the fullmoon and newmoon days, while the monkey troops were watching.
Having swollen to an immeasurable figure, he pressed on the mountain with his feet and hands in an attempt to cross the ocean.
Pressed firmly by Hanuman, the mountain was shaken for a moment which caused the flowers to drop down from the tree tops.
With heaps of flowers full of fragrance fallen down from the trees all over the mountain, it looked as though it was a mountain of flowers.
The mountain pressed hard under the feet of the valiant (Hanuman), discharged streams of water just as an elephant in rut would exude water of intoxication.
Pressed by the powerful Hanuman, mount Mahendra let out streams of the hue of gold and silver (containing the ores of these minerals)৷৷
The mountain threw down big boulders along with sulphur just like fire emits columns of smoke, surrounded by flames.
Squeezed on all sides of the mountain by Hanuman, all creatures living in the caves shrieked making horrible sounds .
Due to the crushing of the mountain, a loud noise of the various creatures shot up filling the earth in all directions and groves around.
The snakes spread out their broad hoods manifesting swastika marks on them and bit the rocks with their fangs pouring out terrible fire.
Bitten by the venomous and angry snakes, the mountain was broken into a thousand pieces by the blazing flames.
Even the medicinal herbs grown on the mountain could not neutralize the effect of the poison of snakes.
Even the ascetics left the place approaching that the mountain would be broken into pieces by creatures. The alarmed vidyadharas leaped into the sky along with groups of their women, leaving behind golden jugs of wine as well as precious utensils, big and small sizes, and golden goblets, cups in the drinking place, as well as many tasty eatables like licking food, chewing food and many types of meat. They also left bullhides and swords with golden sheaths.
The intoxicated vidyadharas with eyes red like lotuses, wearing garlands around the neck and smeared with red sandalpaste flew into the sky.
Adorned with necklaces, anklets and armlets, the vidyadharis stayed wonderstruck in the sky, smiling gently in the company of their lovers.
The seers among the Vidyadharas, proficient in different fields of knowledge were also watching the mountain from the sky along with others.
Then the vidyadharas heard the words of praise(of Hanuman) by the sages, seekers of the ultimate truth, the charanas and the siddhas who stood and watched in the clear sky:
"Hanuman the son of the Windgod, who is like a mountain, with extraordinary might  intends to cross the ocean, the abode of crocodiles".
"For the sake of Rama and the vanaras he wants to reach the other shore of the ocean, which is difficult, and indeed impossible".
The vidyadharas heard the sages speaking in that manner on the mountain. They beheld Hanuman, the bull among vanaras, whose strength  was beyond measure.
Hanuman, huge as a mountain moved his body and shook the hair on his body, thundering like a cloud.
Like the king of birds Garuda would shake a serpent, he shook his tail covered with hair in order to take off.
Hanuman had the tail curled at his back which appeared like a big serpent being carried off by Garuda.
The monkey fixed his arms, looking like iron clubs, firmly on the mountain and crouched his waist and contracted his feet.
The glorious and courageous Hanuman his head and shoulders contracted, summoned up all his energy and vigour.
Having cast his eyes upward in order to view the distance and direction in which he had to leap, he restrained his breath in the chest while looking at the sky.
A mighty elephant among vanaras, Hanuman holding his feet firmly and standing in that position, contracted his ears and addressed the monkeys, when he was about to leap:
"Just like an arrow released by Raghava would fly, I too will proceed with the speed of the wind to reach Lanka ruled by Ravana.
"If I am not able to find the  daughter of Janaka at Lanka I will go to heaven, abode of the gods, with the same speed.
"If I do not find Sita in heaven in spite of my efforts, I will bind that king of demons, Ravana and bring him here.
"I will, by all means return successful with Sita or else I will uproot Lanka along with Ravana and bring him here".
Having thus addressed the monkeys the foremost of vanaras,Hanuman endowed with great speed leaped without any exertion. The elephant among monkeys felt like Garuda.
When he took off, numerous trees on the mountain drawing together the branches all over flew along with him.
He swept away the lapwings in heat on the blossoms of the trees by the speed of his thighs while he coursed through the cloudless sky.
Swept away by the force of his thighs, the trees bent forward following him for a while just as relatives accompany their kith and kin on long travel.
Uprooted by the force of Hanuman's thighs,great trees like  sala followed him just like the troops follow the king.
With numerous trees laden with flowers following him, Hanuman who looked like a mountain, presented a queer spectable.
Then the huge trees sank into the ocean of salt water even as mountains did, afraid of Indra's (thunderbolt).
Covered with tender sprouts and buds of different kinds of flowers Hanuman shone brightly like a flying mountain with fireflies.
Shedding their blossoms (under his thrust) the trees dropped into the waters of the sea just like close relatives follow at the time of farewell.
Driven by the wind caused by Hanuman's speed a variety of flowers fell into the ocean because of their light weight and the ocean looked colourful and bright like the starspangled sky.
Covered with blossoms of different kinds and colours, Hanuman looked like a cloud brightened by lightnings in the sky.
The seawater looked splendid with flowers dropped by dint of his speed. It  resembled the firmament spangled with enchanting stars just risen in the sky.
That great Vanara appeared as if he was gulping the entire ocean with its rising waves. While he was looking upward it appeared as though he was keen to drink in the sea as well.
While he was looking upward, that great vanara appeared as if, parched with thirst, he was gulping the entire ocean with its rising waves.
As he was moving in the sky following the direction of the wind, his eyes blazed like two fires burning on the mountain, flashing like lightning.
The large, round, reddishbrown eyes of Hanuman shed their bright light like the rising Moon and Sun.
By the reflection of his copperyred nose, his face looked red like the Sun's orb coming close at twilight.
As the son of the Windgod was flying through the sky, his coiled up tail looked splendid like the banner installed at the festival in honour of Indra (on the fifteenth day of the month of Bhadrapada).
With his white teeth and curled up tail, the wise son of the Windgod looked splendid like the halo of the Sungod.
The great monkey with copperred buttocks (other parts being dark) looked splendid like a cleft mountain with a huge deposit of minerals shining red.
The wind passing through the arm pits of the lionlike vanara crossing the ocean sounded like a thundering cloud.
The elephantlike monkey was seen darting across the ocean(going from north to south) like a meteor risen in the north  along with its tailend falling down the sky.
The vanara expanded into an enormous size form appeared as though moving like the setting Sun. He looked like a huge elephant bound round the waist.
When the vanara was flying in the sky, his shadow reflected in the ocean looked like a ship driven by the wind and sailing on the sea below (as if the lower part of his body was under water and upper part occupied the sky)
Whichever part of the sea over which that monkey flew, it appeared as though it was riotous with eddies, whirlpools and revolving foam etc., stirred up by the speed of his thighs.
As the great vanara was flying swiftly, the oceanic waves in rows dashing against his chest rose as high as the  mountain.
The forceful wind generated by the monkey moving swiftly, and by the clouds agitated the ocean violently, creating dreadful sounds.
As the tiger among the monkeys pushed the big network of waves of the saltwater ocean and leaped forward, it appeared as if  he was drawing the intermediary space dividing the earth and the sky.
Hanuman moving along in high speed looked as if he was counting the mighty waves risen ike Meru and Mandara mountains.
Then the water raised by his onrush along with the cloud widely spread in the sky shone like an outstreched autumnal cloud.
On account of the seawater rising up,  the whales, crocodiles, fish and tortoises laid bare like the limbs of the body disrobed.
Seeing Hanuman, the tiger among vanaras, coursing through the sky the serpents in their seaabode mistook him for Garuda.
The shadow of Hanuman, the lion among monkeys, thirty yojanas long and ten yojanas in breadth appeared more pleasing৷৷
The broad shadow of the son of the Windgod in the sea following him shone like a dark row of clouds sailing in the pristine sky.
Hanuman the great vanara, splendid with a huge body coursing through the air seemed like a winged mountain flying the sky without any support.
As the powerful monkey, an elephant among vanaras, was proceeding swiftly along, the ocean got instantly transformed into a trough on account of water swelling by the force of his flight.
Hanuman was found pulling clusters of big clouds along with him like the Windgod and appeared like Garuda,the king of birds, drawing flocks of birds along with him at the time of landing.
While Hanuman was drawing big clouds which were either white or red or blue or yellow, he looked charming.
Entering into and emerging from the clouds, he looked like the Moon that appears and disappears (behind a bank of clouds).
Then seeing Hanuman crossing quickly, the gods, gandharvas and demons rained flowers on him.
The Sun spared Hanuman from the heat and even the Windgod served him, blowing cool while he was taking leaps in order to fulfil Rama's mission.
The sages praised him while he was coursing through the sky, the gods and gandharvas sang in praise of him extolling his majesty and vigour.
Observing the unwearied monkey the nagas, yakshas, the demons (protecting the southwest), the learned sages and birds praised him.
While the monkeychief was leaping (across the sea) the Seagod wished the wellbeing of the Ikshvaku family and honoured him. (The Seagod belonged to the same race) :
'If I fail to help the monkeychief, the wise will blame me'.
'I expanded on account of a scion of the Ikshvaku race (Sagara) and I should not do anything to make him (Hanuman) suffer since he is the minister helping the Ikshvaku race'.
'I will have to make arrangements for his rest. Later he can resume his journey comfortably'.
Having resolved in his mind, the Seagod addressed the noble, golden mount Mainaka, hidden in the sea:
'O foremost mountain you are kept here by Indra, lord of the gods as a barrier against the intrusion of demons residing in the netherworld.
"You are staying at the entrance preventing the violent demons of the immeasurable nether world from jumping onto the surface.
"O noble mountain you have the capacity to grow across, upward and downward by your free will. I therefore prompt you to grow.
"Valiant Hanuman, a tiger among monkeys and a performer of dreadful deeds, is  flying over you to fulfil Rama's mission
"I should help him for he is working for the welfare of the Ikshavaku family. The Ikshvaku kings are worthy of adoration to me and for you as well.
"You may act as our minister and let us not miss this chance. Pious men lose their cool if a worthy act is left unfulfilled.
"Rise up from the waters. Let him rest on you since this noble monkey is our guest and worthy of worship.
"O goldenpeaked mountainyou are the refuge of the gods and gandharvas. Let him also rest on you for a while before he negotiates the remaining part of the journey.
"You ought to rise up if you consider the nobility of the scion of the Kakusthas, the deportation of Mythili, and the exertion put forth by Hanuman, the lord of monkeys".
Hearing the command of the god of the ocean, mount Mainaka, rich in gold and covered with trees and creepers rose up at once from the water.
Just as the rising Sun comes out with glowing rays tearing the veil of dark clouds, the mountain rose up from the water of the ocean.
At the instance of Varuna, (the presiding deity of the ocean) the lofty mountain appeared, projecting its peaks, hitherto submerged in the water. The golden peaks inhabited by nagas and kinnaras resemmbled the rising Sun as though scraping the sky in a moment.
The sky shone like barnished weapons smeared with the golden colour of the  mountain peaks that rose up above the water.
The noble mountain, Mainaka was glittering  like a thousand Suns with selfeffulgent golden peaks shining.
Hanuman considered the mountain rising up in the midst of the ocean and standing in front an impediment.
The great vanara,who was swift in action felled down the mountain that had risen high instantly with his chest just as the wind would strike a cloud.
Felled by the vanara's speed, the tall mountain overwhelmed with joy roared in high pitch.
Now the mountain assumed a human form  and standing on its own summit, which stood very high, and glad at heart, addressed the heroic vanara gone to the aerial region.
"O best of vanaras you have achieved a formidable deed. Alighting on my peak and comfortably resting awhile, you may resume your journey.
"The son of Rama's family, Sagara, has extended the ocean in the past.It is most appropriate that he (the god of the sea) honours you in return as you have set out in the service of Rama.
"I was prompted by the ocean for your sake since he has great regard for you. O great monkey you may rest here for a while and continue your journey. The lord of the ocean feels that this tiger among monkeys can cover the distance of a hundred yojanas. He tells me, 'let him rest on your peak and then cover the rest of the distance'.
"O foremost of the monkeys after eating plenty of sweet and tasty roots and fruits and resting a while you may go.
"O chief of monkeys, indeed we too have a relationship with you based on merit  which is wellknown to all the three worlds.
"O son of the Windgod you are an elephant among monkeys, the foremost among them who move at a high speed.
"Even a newcomer, however ordinary, deserves worship by a wise man who wishes to educate himself in the path of righteousness. Needless to say that distinguished guest like you deserves all reverence.
"O foremost among the vanaras you are the son of the highsouled Windgod's, preeminent among the gods, you are also equal to him in speed.
"O knower of righteousness to worship you is to honour the Windgod. Therefore you are worthy of worship for me. I will tell you the reason. Listen.
"Formerly in Kritayuga, O dear, mountains were endowed with wings. They used to move speedily in all directions like Garuda and the Windgod.
"When they moved about, even hosts of sages, gods and creatures panicked for fear of falling down (and destroying all worlds).
"Provoked at this, the thousandeyed Indra who had performed a hundred sacrifices cut off the wings of mountains into a thousands pieces with his thunderbolt.
"O distinguished vanara your father, the Windgod threw me down into this saltwater sea. Thus my wings were protected.
"O esteemed vanara the Windgod is revered by me and so I honour you. O chief of monkeys, my bondage with you is therefore of high value to me, indeed.
"O great monkey when I hold you so high, you ought to oblige me and the (god of the) ocean wholeheartedly (and accept our hospitalty).
"O noble monkey oblige us by accepting our offering given with love and be relieved of your fatigue. Your presence itself is welcome to me".
The great Hanuman, pleased with the words of Mainaka, said "I am pleased at your hospitality. Remove your unhappiness.
"My commitment is hastening me. The day set (for the accomplishment of the task) is also drawing to a close. A vow is made and I will not halt in the middle of my work."
Having said this, the mighty monkey gently touched the mountain with his hands before ascending to the sky with a smile on his face.
The mountain and the sea honoured and adored the son of the Windgod and gave him appropriate  blessings.
And thereafter leaping a long distance into the clear sky, he (Hanuman) took the path of the Windgod, his father, leaving behind the mountain and the sea.
Rising higher and further up and looking at the mountain (which was going down into the ocean), the son of the Windgod coursed through the cloudless sky unsupported.
Gods, siddhas as well as the great sages praised him for the second great achievment of Hanuman, which is impossible for others to accomplish.
The gods who happened to be present at that time (on the mountain) and the thousandeyed Indra were delighted by the gesture of golden Sunabha (Mainaka) mountain.
Indra, the lord of Sachi, was personally satisfied and spoke to Mainaka, the best of mountains, in faltering tone, his throat choked out of joy.
"O Hiranyanabha, the foremost among the mountains I am highly pleased with you. I give you security (free from fear of losing wings). O pious one you may stay on happily as you please.
"You have rendered very valuable help to Hanuman who was attempting to leap  a distance of a hundred yojanas. He is fearless even when there is reason to fear (of falling down).
"The vanara has gone on a mission to help the son of Dasaratha. I am highly pleased with the service rendered to him.
Thereafter Mainaka, the great mountain was delighted to see Indra,  lord of the gods, performer of a hundred yajnas satisfied.
Then mount Mainaka, assured by Indra became secure. And Hanuman also crossed over the ocean in a short while.
Then the gods, gandharvas, siddhas and great sages approached Surasa, the mother of nagas, who was glowing like the Sungod and said:.
"The glorious son of the Windgod, called Hanuman, is crossing the ocean. Obstruct him for sometime by assuming the hideous form of a demon, gigantic as a mountain, fearful with yellowishbrown eyes, with big teeth and a wide mouth like the sky.
"We want to assess his strength, valour and intelligence once again. We wish to know whether he will win or give way to despondency".
Thus honoured by the gods, Surasa assumed a terrific ugly form frightening to all and stood in the midst of the ocean. Putting up a distorted appearance and encompassing Hanuman who was crossing the ocean, she spoke to him:
"O bull among vanaras the lords of the universe have provided you as food for me. I will eat you. Enter my mouth".
Thus addressed by Surasa,  the glorious Hanuman said this with a blooming face and folded hands:
"Dasaratha's son called Rama accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and his wife Vaidehi entered Dandaka forest.
"While Rama was engaged otherwise, his glorious wife Sita was abducted by Ravana actuated by deeprooted enmity of demons with him.
"I am going as Rama's emissary to search for his wife. It is proper for you to render help since you are a resident of his kingdom.
Having heard Hanuman, Surasa capable of taking any form at her free will told him that no one can cross (her region) as she had been given such a boon(by the Creator)৷৷
Surasa, mother of serpents, observing that Hanuman was attempting to escape, said this in order to gauge his strength:
"O best vanara you must pass through my mouth today. Such is the boon granted to me by Brahma in the past". Then she quickly opened her big mouth and stood.
Thus addressed by Surasa, Hanuman the supreme vanara said, "Open your mouth wide enough to hold me."
Provoked by the words of Surasa, Hanuman stretched himself to ten yojanas.
Seeing his body stretched to ten yojanas like a cloud, Surasa also widened her mouth to twenty yojanas.
Provoked, Hanuman further stretched his body to thirty yojanas and Surasa on her own enlarged her mouth to forty yojanas. Then the great hero Hanuman stretched his body to fifty yojanas.
Surasa widened her mouth sixty yojanas and then the heroic Hanuman enlarged himself to seventy yojanas.
Surasa widened her mouth to eighy yojanas and the heroic Hanuman grew up to ninety yojanas, looking like a mountain.
Intelligent Hanuman observing Surasa's enlarged mouth open and dreadful like hell with a long tongue, suddenly shrunk his body to the size of a thumb.
Glorious and mighty  Hanuman quickly went into her mouth and got out and stood in the sky and said:.
"O Dakshayani I have indeed entered your mouth and your boon has come true (as nobody can go against the boon of the Creator). Allow me to proceed in quest of Vaidhehi. My salutations to you."
Seeing Hanuman released out of her mouth like the Moon released from the mouth of Rahu, Surasa assumed her true form and said:
"O noble vanara proceed happily to achieve your purpose. Go and unite Vaidehi with the noble self, Raghava.
Witnessing Hanuman achieving a very difficult feat for the third time, all the living beings applauded him saying "Well done, welldone".
Rising above the invincible ocean, the abode of lord Varuna, Hanuman coursed through the sky speedily like Garuda.
Hanuman passed through the path of wind like Garuda. The region was refreshed with clouds that released torrents of rain and frequented by birds. The great masters of music (Tumburu, Narada and Gandharvas) trained in Kasika moved there driven by lions, elephants, tigers, birds and serpents and were moving in different aerial vehicles. It was splendid with god at fire who strikes fiercely like thunderbolt. It was inhabited by great sages who had acquired merit. The region was traversed by firegod who carried havis in large quantities earnestly. It was decorated with planets, constellations, Moon, Sun and clusters of stars. It was filled with groups of greal sages, gandharvas, nagas and yakshas. It was isolated part of the universe traversed by the king of gandharvas like Vishvavasu. It was an auspicious path for Moon and Sun, a sporting ground for Airavata, the vehicle of lord Indra. It was an extensive world of living beings created by Brahma. It was frequented by many heroes ascending to heaven and blocked by vidyadharas.
Hanuman passed through the path of wind like Garuda. The region was refreshed with clouds that released torrents of rain and frequented by birds. The great masters of music (Tumburu, Narada and Gandharvas) trained in Kasika moved there driven by lions, elephants, tigers, birds and serpents and were moving in different aerial vehicles. It was splendid with god at fire who strikes fiercely like thunderbolt. It was inhabited by great sages who had acquired merit. The region was traversed by firegod who carried havis in large quantities earnestly. It was decorated with planets, constellations, Moon, Sun and clusters of stars. It was filled with groups of greal sages, gandharvas, nagas and yakshas. It was isolated part of the universe traversed by the king of gandharvas like Vishvavasu. It was an auspicious path for Moon and Sun, a sporting ground for Airavata, the vehicle of lord Indra. It was an extensive world of living beings created by Brahma. It was frequented by many heroes ascending to heaven and blocked by vidyadharas.
Hanuman, son of the Windgod was seen everywhere in the sky. He appeared like a longwinged king of mountains unsupported.
Seeing Hanuman speeding in the sky a demoness called Simhika who can assume any form at her will had grown out of proportion and thought on her part:
Thinking thus, she dragged him by his shadow before she took hold of him, Hanuman started deliberating within.
"I am caught suddenly. I am handicapped.I am like a huge ship in an ocean retarded by the wind blowing from the opposite direction.
Looking around, right and left, up and down, the monkey saw a huge being rise from the salty sea.
Seeing the form with a hideous countenance, Hanuman reflected about the creature of ugly appearance endowed with power which can catch a creature though his shadow, about which king Sugriva had once told him. 'It is the same creature, no doubt', said Hanuman.
Recognising the true nature of Simhika the clutcher of shadows, the wise Hanuman grew to a huge size like a cloud in rainy season.
Observing the body of Hanuman growing in size, Simhika started distending her mouth wide like the depth of the underworld.
Roaring like a heavy mass of clouds, Simhika chased Hanuman. Intelligent Hanuman observed her enormous mouth and noticed her vital parts.
Hanuman, the vanara whose physique was as hard as thunderbolt suddenly contracted once again and entered her opened mouth.
The siddhas and charanas who were watching his performance of drowning in her mouth were amazed as though the moon is seized by Rahu on a fullmoon night.
The vanara who had the speed of mind tore her vital parts with his sharp nails and rushed out quickly before she closed her mouth.
Selfcontrolled Hanuman, the great monkey acting with firmness of mind and ingenuity threw her down and once again rapidly grew in size.
Heart torn asunder and killed by Hanuman, miserable Simhika instantly fell into the sea water. Observing it, the beings who ranged the sky said to the foremost of vanaras:
"O great jumper a great deed has been done by you today in killing that fierce creature. O great monkey fulfil your mission without any obstruction.
"O lord of vanaras he in whom these four qualities, fortitude, vision, intelligence and dexterity exist as in you will achieve his mission and not get lost".
Honoured by them the venerable monkey went ascending into the sky like Garuda to achieve the objective.
On reaching the other side of the shore crossing  a hundred yojanas, he saw rows of forest trees.
Hanuman, the best among jumpers, even while in air he saw an island adorned with many trees, also gardens adjacent to Malaya mountain.
The mighty Hanuman crossed the inviolable sea, stood comfortably on the peak of Trikuta mountain and looked at Lanka.
Covered fully with the continuous shower of flowers dropped on him from the trees, heroic Hanuman appeared as though he was a heap of flowers as he stood there.
The glorious, powerful vanara (Hanuman) even after crossing a hundred yojanas, felt neither suffocated nor exasperated.
(He said to himself), "I can cross a distance of even hundreds of yojanas. What to say of a hundred yojanas which is a calculated distance."
Courageous and exalted Hanuman, the best among vanaras, noted for his speed reached Lanka crossing over the great ocean on his own.
Hanuman passed through forests laden with fragrant flowers, bluish grassy land, big rocks and mountains covered with trees.
Brilliant Hanuman, a bull among monkeys, crossed the mountains covered with blossoming trees and forest ranges.
That son of the Windgod stood on the mountain and saw the forests and groves round Lanka situated on the mountain peak.
The mighty vanara saw around Lanka, trees like sarala, karnikara in full bloom, datepalms, priyala, muchulinda, kutaja, kethaka trees filled with fragrance priyangu, kadamba, so also flowering plants like saptachhada, asana, kovidara and karaveera fully loaded with flowers and buds. These trees were thronged by birds, with their branches shaken by the wind. Flocks of swans and waterfowls were found in ponds of different types. There were various pleasure groves with flowers in bloom and fruits of all seasons and varieties of water resorts and delightful gardens.
Fortunate Hanuman having reached Lanka ruled by Ravana found it surrounded by moats full of blue lotuses, guarded by demons with frightening bows, in view of Sita abducted and kept there. It was protected by boundary walls inlaid with gold that great and beautiful city with buildings resembling the assembly of planets and whitewashed, elevated  houses looking like autumnal clouds and well laid out streets decorated with garlands of banners and flag posts, rows of colourful creepers and festoons. The city of Lanka appeared like Amaravati, the city of gods.
The foremost among the vanaras, perched on top of the mountain saw the city of Lanka on the mountain with auspicious mansions as though touching the sky.
The city of Lanka, ruled by the lord of demons and built by Visvakarma looked as if it was a city floating in the sky.
Having reached the northern entrance of the city he started thinking that Visvakarma must have conceived Lanka as a lady with its ramparts as her hips and loins, moats filled with water as her robes, the spiked iron tridents as her locks of hair, and the tall towers as her her ear rings
Observing Lanka that resembled mount Kailas, with sky scrapers appearing as if flying, filled with dreadful demons and nagas protecting the city of Bhogavati (the city of Patala), unimaginably wellbuilt. It was once occupied by Kubera (half brother of Ravana). It was guarded by horrible demons holding tridents and spears in their hands. The city appeared like a cavern protected by venomous serpents with protruding fangs. Hanuman examined the high security of Lanka and looked at the ocean. He thought of the form of Ravana, a formidable  enemy:
'It is not possible for monkeys to come here and even if they do, it is no use.  Lanka is invincible even to the gods in war.
'What will  Rama the mighty armed hero do even after reaching this formidable city of Lanka ruled by Ravana?
'There is no scope for reconciliation with the demons. It is not possible to win over them with gifts. They cannot be divided by dissension. There is no scope for war.
'Only four great monkeys can have access to this place. They are Angada the son of Vali, Nila, Sugriva, the wise king of monkeys and myself.
'Whether Janaka's daughter, Vaidehi is alive or not is not known. After seeing her I shall think over'.
Standing on the mountain, the elephant among monkeys pondered for a while on the means of finding Sita, in which lay the welfare of Rama.
'I shall not be able  in my present form to enter the city guarded by fierce and powerful demons.
'To accomplish this great task I will have to assume an inconspicious form and enter the city of Lanka in the night as that is the appropriate time.
'Looking at the city, unassailable even to gods and demons, Hanuman sighed again and again thinking:
'By what means can I find Mythili, daughter of Janaka, without being noticed by the evilminded Ravana, the lord of demons?
'How can the purpose of Rama, a noble soul be not spoilt? I may have a private audience with the daughter of Janaka.
'Just as darkness disappears at Sunrise, wellplanned strategies also fail at the hands of a thoughtless messenger when they are set in opposition to proper time and place.
'Even though messengers are not intelligent, they think themselves clever and capable. They act foolishly, swerve from proper course of action and fail in their effort.
'How should the task be performed? How to avoid impetuousness? How can my purpose of crossing the ocean be not wasted?
'If I am seen by the demons, the plan of Rama, possessor of selfknowledge, to kill Ravana, will be wasted.
'It is difficult to stay with the demon anywhere here even in the disguise of a demon without being identified. It will not be possible to remain unidentified even by assuming any other form.
'I think even the wind who has no form cannot move here without being detected. Nothing escapes the notice of powerful demons. There is nothing unknown to them.
'I will surely meet with death if I hide here in my original form and my master's mission also will be spoilt.
'Therefore I shall transform myself into a tiny form and jump about the city of Lanka during night time in order to accomplish Raghava's purpose.
'Entering by night the inaccessible city of Ravana, I shall search all over the palace and find Sita'.
Having planned in that manner the heroic Hanuman keen to see Sita waited for the Sunset.
When Sun set, Maruti, the son of the Windgod, reduced himself at night to the small size of a cat, wonderful to behold.
As soon as dusk had set in, courageous Hanuman jumped in and entered the well laidout royal path of the beautiful city.
Hanuman saw the city stretched with rows of buildings all over,with seven or eight storied  mansions, which had pillars of gold and silver, windows with fretwork of gold, inlaid with crystals, floors decorated with gold, resembling the grand city of gandharvas.
Inlaid with precious gems and fretwork, and ornamented with pearls, the mansions of demons looked splendid.
The golden archways of the demon were colourful. They illuminated the well   decorated Lanka from all sides.
Beholding Lanka of unimaginable, wonderful glory, the great monkey keen to see Sita became sad as well as elated at once (He did not know how to find Sita in that city and felt sad. But he was also elated that he was going to meet her at any cost.)
He found that famed place with a garland of tall, white mansions, conspicuous with archways latticed with gold strings, protected by mighty Ravana and surrounded by terrific demons.
Even the Moon rose with thousands of rays in the centre of multitudes of stars overspreading and illumining the world with a canopy of bright beams, as if to render ministerial help to Hanuman.
The heroic vanara saw the rising Moon flitting in and out shining like a fresh white conch, in the colour of milk and lotus stalks, bright like a swan floating in the lakelike sky.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्वितीयस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the second sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The mighty son of the Windgod, intelligent Hanuman, an elephant among vanaras, standing on the peak of the Lamba which looked like a high rainbearing cloud and relying on his energy, entered by night the city of Lanka, ruled by Ravana  rich in delightful forests, groves and water pools.
Hanuman, happy to reach Lanka, stood on its rampart and surveyed the city of land which was splendid with beautiful mansions overcast with autumnal clouds pierced by glittering streaks of lightning, served by planets and stars with mild winds blowing (out of fear of Ravana), with the roaring sounds of the sea and with a wellfed army like Vitapavati (that is Alaka, the capital of Kubera, halfbrother of Ravana and the treasurer of celestials),  which had elephants sationed at the outer gates, provided with white archways and protected by serpents like the auspicious city of Bhogavati (capital of Patala). Surrounded by a golden rampart, the city resembled Amaravati, the capital of Indra, decorated with flags fluttering, echoing with the jingling sounds of small bells.
Surveying all over, Hanuman was wonderstruck to see as though it was leaping into the sky. The city had golden shutters, altars encrusted with vaidurya, mansions inlaid with diamonds, crystals, pearls and other gems, crowned with pure gold and silver. The staircases built with silver were studded with vaidurya. The beautiful quadrangles, coverd with grains of crystal were as though leaping into the air. It echoed with sounds of krauncha birds, peacocks and royal swans. Filled with sounds of musical instruments, it resembled the city of Vaswokasara.
Gazing at the enchanting, auspicious, prosperous city of the king of demons mighty Hanuman began to reflect:
'It is not possible to attack this city by to outsiders as it is protected by the forces of Ravana with their weapons ready(to attack).
'This land can be reached by Kumuda and Angada or the great vanara Sushena and even by Mainda and Dvivida.
'Son of Vivaswan (Sugriva), the chief of vanaras, Kushaparva, Riksha (Jambavan) and myself also will be able to reach this place.
Reflecting upon the valour of longarmed Rama and valiant advances of Lakshmana Hamuman felt pleased (within himself).
Hanuman looked at the city of the demon king, whose darkness was dispelled by bright gems and mighty mansions as if it were a young maiden. The prosperous city was like a well decorated woman, adorned with ornaments having walls for her dress, the stables for her earrings, the armouries for her breasts.
Assuming her real form the presiding deity of Lanka noticed the son of the Windgod, the tiger among vanaras of great prowess entering the city.
Seeing the best of vanaras, the deity of the city of Lanka, ruled by Ravana rose up before him in a distorted form.
She stood in front of the son of the Windgod and spoke to him in a loud voice.
"O dweller of the forest, who are you? Why did you come here? Speak the truth about your identity, so long as you hold on to your life.
"O vanara this Lanka is a secret place protected by Ravana's army everywhere. It is surely not possible for you to enter this city".
Then Hanuman who was standing in front of her said, "I will tell you the truth since you are asking me".
"Who are you, terrible woman of ugly, distorted eyes? Why are you obstructing me at the gate of the city? Why do you impound upon me?
The spirit of Lanka who could assume any form at her will got enraged on hearing the words of Hanuman and spake in a harsh tone.
"In obedience to the orders of the great demon king, Ravana, I am protecting this unassailable city.
"It is not possible for you to enter this city ignoring my presence. Soon you will be killed. You will give up your life and attain eternal sleep.
"O monkey I am the presiding ogress of Lanka presenting myself personally. I  am to protect this city. This is my answer to you".
On hearing the words of ogress of Lanka, the son of the Windgod stood up ready and appeared like another mountain.
Seeing the monster of a woman, the powerful Hanuman, bull among vanaras endowed with wisdom spoke to her.
"I would like to see this Lanka with marketplaces, gateways and ramparts. I have come here for that purpose. My curiosity has been roused to see this place.
"I have arrived here to see Lanka's gardens, groves and forests and also all the important houses".
On hearing Hanuman, the ogress of Lanka, who could assume any form, replied in harsh words:
"O evilminded, foolish monkey It is not possible for you to enter the city ruled by Ravana, the king of demons without conquering me".
The tiger among monkeys said to the, the nightwalker "O noble Lanka I shall see this city and go back".
Then the ogress of Lanka made a loud and frightening sound and struck the most powerful vanara  with the palm of her hand.
At this strong slap, the heroic Hanuman, son of the Windgod roared loudly.
Overcome by anger, Hanuman clenched the fingers of his left hand and hit her with his fist. Considering her to be, after all, a woman he did not turn outrageous.
Struck by the blow of Hanuman the demoness fell down on the ground at once, her limbs shattered, her face distorted.
Wise and brilliant Hanuman, seeing the deity fallen down, left her (without killing her) out of compassion, thinking that she is a woman, after all.
Thereafter, the deflated demoness of Lanka with an agitated voice, said to Hanuman, the monkeyhero:
"O, strongshouldered great monkey be gracious. Save me. Heroes endowed with great strength stay back when the time comes.
"O monkey I am Lanka incarnate. You have conquered me by your strength and valour.
"O lord of vanaras in the past Creator Brahma had given me a boon which has come true. I will tell you. listen.
'When a vanara vanquishes you by his prowess, you may know that destruction of ogres will set in.
"O gentle one the time ordained by Brahma has come today with your presence  here. The truth revealed by Brahma, the selfborn, cannot be proved otherwise.
"The ruin of all demons and evilminded king Ravana will take place due to (the abduction of) Sita.
"O great vanara enter the city ruled by Ravana and accomplish your purpose.
"O lord of vanaras you may search for the chaste lady, daughter of king Janaka all over freely entering this doomed city, ruled by the chief of demons.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायाणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे तृतीयस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the third sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hanuman, the strongshouldered, mighty monkey chief having defeated the (presiding) deity of Lanka who could assume any form at her will, leaped over the boundary wall of the rear entrance of the excellent city by his prowess.
Hanuman, a devotee of the king of monkeys entered the city of Lanka placing his left foot first on the forehead of the city and proceeded (by tradition one enters the enemy's dwelling by placing the left foot first to cause defeat of the enemy).
The son of the Windgod, endowed with great strength, entered the enchanting Lanka and walked along the highway set with flowers of pearls.
The houses reverberating with sounds of laughter and of musical instruments, decorated with lattice windows of diamonds resembled the sky shining with clouds with a goad made of diamond (thunderbolt of Indra).
The city of Lanka appeared radiant with its tall mansions resembling white clouds. The  mansions had auspicious marks of lotus and swastika engraved on them and were opening in the direction of the south.
Glorious Hanuman, wellwisher of Sugriva, king of vanaras, looked around the city, decorated with colourful garlands. Surveying it for the cause of Raghava, he was greatly delighted.
Going from one building to another, Hanuman saw mansions of different kinds  structures.
He heard melodious songs of intoxicated women set to tune in three places namely chest, throat and head and three pitches known as mandra (slow) madhya (medium) and tara (high). The songs resembled those of the apsarasas well set in musical notes set to music.
Great Hanuman heard the jingling sounds of waist bells and anklets of women and sounds of great men climbing up and down flights of steps, sounds of clapping and joking everywhere in the mansions.
He heard chantings of sacred verses in the houses of demons engaged in the study of the vedas. And heard demons singing loudly the eulogy of Ravana.
He observed large contingents of demons lining the highway and spies of Ravana stationed in the middle of the city.
Going around Lanka, Hanuman witnessed all kinds of demons priests who were performing rituals, ascetics with matted hair, some with shaven heads, and some robed in cowhides. Some were  holding fistfuls of darbha grass (as weapons), others held sacrificial tools (as weapons), some had mallets, some hammers and others had staff and spikes. Some looked frightful with a single eye, some with a single ear, some with drooping stomachs and sagging breasts and in distorted forms. Similarly some dwarfs and some wielding iron weapons, their bodies covered with wonderful shields some not very tall or short, not stout or thin, not very dark and not with hideous forms or mutilated bodies. Some had goodlooking countenances, some were seen holding posts and flags and weapons of several kinds.
The great monkey saw the demons who held shaktis and trees as weapons (Shakti is a lance), some held threepointed spears, missiles and slings with which missiles are hurled. Some of them wore flower garlands, smeared unguents on their body and were bedecked with choicest ornaments. They were dressed in several ways and many of them moved freely. They were very strong and held sharp tridents and armed with thunderboltlike weapons.
Hanuman saw in front of the harem one hundred thousand strong, vigilant soldiers of a middle rank ordered by the lord of demons.
The great monkey observed the huge archway of the demon king's palace made of gold situated on top of the mountain as if scraping the sky, circled by moats full of white lotuses appearing as though the moats were decorated with earornaments. The whole city was encircled by a boundary wall.
And then the great vanara entered the wonderful mansion that resembled heaven. It was resonating with pleasing sounds of jingling ornaments made more noisy by the neighing of the horses. There were carriages, chariots, flying chariots, horses and elephants. The beautiful entrance was looking splendid with intoxicated animals and birds. That place looked splendid with fourtusked elephants resembling heaps of white clouds. The beautiful entrance was guarded by thousands of valiant demons.
Hanuman entered the harem of Ravana surrounded by walls of gold inlaid with precious pearls and other gems and sprinkled with excellent black agaru and sandal water.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुर्थस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fourth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Then intelligent Hanuman observed the Moon in the central part of the sky spreading a canopy of his luminescence like the Sun, and looking like an intoxicated mighty (white) bull moving in a stable.
While moving forward, Hanuman saw the Moon spreading his light, thereby warding off the agony of all creatures, causing the swelling of the ocean and illuminating the earth as well as the sky.
'The  same splendour on the Mandara mountain on earth, which glows at dusk lay on the ocean is there, on lotuses in the lakes and on the beautiful Moon also.
'Like a swan in a cage of silver, like a lion in a cave of Mandara mountain, like a hero on a proud, intoxicated elephant, the Moon shone in the sky.
The fullmoon with its hornlike spot  shone like a bull with sharp horns, like the  white Himalayan mountain with its lofty peaks, and like an elephant with gold plated tusks
With the Sun, the great planet (star), destroying the frost that forms the dew, the Moon with its stain shone with graceful radiance.
The Moon shone bright like a lion mounted on a rock, like a lordly elephant in a deep forest, like a king on attaining the kingdom.
At  the time of moonrise, the darkness of dusk is dispelled, the dark deeds of cannibals disappear, the natural instinct for love returns to women as the radiance of the Moon spreads everywhere like in heaven.
Pleasing sounds of string instruments had begun to be heard. Chaste women were found asleep with their husbands.The nightrangers had begun their strange (evil and cruel) deeds exhibiting their anger.
Intelligent Hanuman, the great warrior, observed there in the prosperous mansions, demons proud of their wealth, highly intoxicated and dull, their houses full of horsedrawn chariots with comfortable seats.
The intoxicated demons were quarrelling, ridiculing one another bitterly and wildly throwing their stout arms on one another, indulging in incoherent talk, uttering vulgar words.
The demons were seen expanding their chests sportively and caressing their wives by placing their limbs on them. They were assuming wonderful forms, and drawing their bows up to their ears.
He even saw women collected there, their limbs smeared with unguents on their bodies, like wise women with beautiful countenances laughing at others, some sleeping, and others hissing (sighing) like angry serpents.
There were huge elephants trumpeting, respected people, warriors sighing for the lack of enemies (to vanquish). It had a lake infested with hissing snakes.
He saw there in the city of Lanka, demons, who were intellectuals, pleasing in words, with faith in religion, preeminent heroes of the world  of different kinds, followers of good practices and with lovely names.
He rejoiced to see the handsome demons radiant with forms commensurate with their virtues. He also saw some ugly figures, their traits in conformity to their forms.
There he saw demonesses adorned with choicest ornaments, their minds attached faithfully to their husbands and bottles of wine. Some of the wives of the demons, however, looked gentle and bright like stars.
There he saw cheerful demonesses shining brightly, abashed by the embrace of their beloveds during the night. He also saw those sporting with their beloveds freely and looking like birds embracing flowers.
Intelligent Hanuman saw demonesses seated happily on the laps of their beloved ones on the terraces of the mansions, exhibiting their attachment to one another,  overwhelmed with sexual pleasure.
Ogresses without veil, some altruistic, some separated from their husbands looked pale like the Moon, though possessed of  polished gold complexion.
That heroic monkey saw ogresses delighted in the happy company of their loved ones who have joined them, ecstatic wives in the houses.
He saw rows of faces of shedemons shining like moonlight with sidelong glances and graceful eyelashes wearing ornaments resembling charmimg flashes of lightning.
Hanuman could not find Sita  anywhere, an excellent lady  born in a noble royal family, adopting the right path, a lady  delicate like a blossoming creeper of good breed, or so he imagined.
'Sita must have had a pair of beautiful eyes. She must have been a passionate lady with mind fixed on her glorious husband. Ever established in dharma, she is perhaps a distinguished lady compared to her counterparts (in Lanka).
She whose neck  was adorned with costly ornaments earlier must be shedding hot tears now, her throat choked with grief. With her beautiful eyelashes and a sweet loving voice, she would be now like a  peahen wandering in the woods.
She would be like a barely visible ray of the Moon, like a streak of gold covered with dust, like an unhealed scar of a wound caused by an arrow only superficially covered and like a flake of cloud swept off by the wind.
Hanuman stood griefstricken, having (unsuccessfully) searched for a long time for the wife of Rama, the lord of men. The highly eloquent was now despondent. For a while he looked dull and dejected.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fifth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The mighty Hanuman, who could assume any form at will, not finding Sita in the tall mansions, again started rapidly ranging in Lanka.
Then he reached the residence of the lord of demons enclosed by a red colour compound wall dazzling like the midday Sun.
The elephant among vanaras (Hanuman), scanned the mansion defended by dreadful demons like a forest protected by lions.
He saw beautiful silver archways decorated with gold, colourful inner apartments with beauteous entrances.
(He saw) archways guarded by riders mounted on majestic elephants and unwearied riders of chariots drawn by horses of irresistible speed kept ready.
There were wonderful chariots covered with skins of lions and tigers, encrusted with ivory, gold and silver with ringing bells moving about.
The palace was embellished with excellent seats and vessels with many precious gems. There were spacious places to accommodate big chariorts filled with shouts of great charioteers.
It was pleasing with several kinds of beautiful beasts in their thousands all over.
The place was full of beautful women, carefully protected by disciplined guards as well as demons.
Full of the jewels of joyous women, the residence of the lord of demons reverberated with the jingling of their ornaments and accessories like the sound of the sea.
The place was full of eminent demons with royal traits like a dense forest infested with lions. It carried the fragrance of agaru and sandal of good quality.
Reverberating with the sounds of trumpets, mridangam and conches, there the demons daily performed worships and sacrifices on new and fullmoon days.
The place produced deep sounds like the sea. Those mighty ogres wore gemstudded ornaments. The great vanara saw the residence of the great self, Ravana rich with precious gems.
Hanuman, the great monkey, saw the royal mansion looking brilliant with elephants, horses and chariots. He thought that the palace was the very ornament of Lanka. He moved unnoticed into the close quarters of Ravana.
Hanuman ranged undaunted from one mansion to another including the pleasure gardens.
Courageous and swift, Hanuman sprang from Prahasta's house to Mahaparshva's, and so on.
Then the great vanara leaped from the residence of Kumbhakarna which looked like a cloud to Vibhishana's.
The great vanara leaped from Mahodara's to Virupaksha's, from Vidyujjihva's to Vidyunmali and then to Vajradanstra's.
The brilliant leader of monkeys bounded to the house of Suka, to the clever Sarana's and to Indrajit's.
The noble vanara jumped from Jambumali's to Sumali's and from  Rashmiketu's, Suryaketu's and to Vajrakaya's residence.
Hanuman jumped the houses of Dhumraksha, Sampati, Vidyudrupa, Bhima, Ghana and Vighana, Sukanasa, Vakra, Shatha, Vikata, Brahmakarna, Damshtra Romasa, Yuddhonmatta, Matta, Dhvajagriva, Nadi, Vidyujjihva and Indrajihva Hastimukha, Karala, Pisacha and Sonitaksha.
The illustrious son of the Windgod jumped from house to house in an order and saw the wealth of the wealthy in the lofty mansions.
Passing all the mansions, the lucky Hanuman reached the residence of the demon king, Ravana.
The heroic and powerful vanara saw at Ravana's residence demonesses with hideous eyes guarding the bed and an army of demons holding tridents, hammers, powerful javelins and iron cudgels.
At his (Ravana's) residence, Hanuman also noticed troops of huge demons ready with different kinds of weapons.
He saw horses of high speed in red, white and cream colours. He saw beautiful, wellbred elephants, which were not inferior to the enemy's. They were welltrained and had proved equal to Airavata (Indra's elephant) in battles. Resembling the thundering clouds, they were unassailable to the enemy in war and were trumpeting like a cluster of clouds.
He saw in the palace of Ravana, the demon king, thousands of troops adorned with gold, fully protected with armour of gold shining like the morning Sun.
The son of the Windgod saw at the palace of Ravana, the lord of demons, colourful palanquins of several kinds, bowers, picture galleries, spots for sporting, hillocks (artificial) made of wood, apartments for romance, for pleasures and day time activities.
Comparable to mount Mandara, it was crowded with peacocks, set with flag staffs fixed all over, magnificent mansions built by skilled craftsmen with great efforts, decked with gems of several kinds, rich with treasures comparable to Kailasa, the home of Siva, the Lord of all beings.
The palace of Ravana looked splendid with gems of different hues and with Ravana's presence, it was shining like the radiant Sungod.
The leader of the vanaras saw there beds, seats and main vessels made of gold.
Hanuman entered the delightful, lofty palace comparable to Kubera's mansion. It was filled with vessels encrusted with gems scattered all over. The floor was drenched with liquor. It was resonating with sounds of golden anklets of women and of drums. The rows of mansions, lofty palaces with welllaid apartments were full of hundreds of exquisite women.इत्यार्षे वाल्मीकीये श्रीमद्रामायणे आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षष्ठस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Powerful Hanuman beheld the conglomeration of buildings with golden lattices encrusted with vaidurya, with flocks of birds comparable to a complex of clouds pierced by lightning during rainy season.
Attached to the spacious halls of the houses, were storehouses for valuable  conches, weapons, bows and arrows. On the top of the attics on these mansions, were large and delightful terraces open to the Moon.
The monkey saw numerous kinds of treasures, cherished by gods and demons, which were won by Ravana's might.
The mansions of the lord of Lanka built with great care and  effort on earth were  by all means excellent  and appeared as though built personally by Maya (the divine architect wellknown for magical skills).
Hanuman beheld the magnificent and soulcaptivating palace possessing the splendour of molten gold. Of matchless beauty, it looked like a towering cloud worthy of the might of Ravana, the lord of ogresses.
It appeared splendid like a scattered piece of heaven on earth, glittering with countless gems. It looked like a mountain peak covered with pollen of flowers dropped from all kinds of trees.
The aerial chariot was lit up by resplendent women just as a raincloud dazzles with flashes of lightning. It was auspicious, worthy of worship. It looked as if it was drawn by royal swans in the sky.
A jewel among aerial chariots, it looked colourful with many gems beset. It appeared like the summit of a mountain decorated with the colours of minerals, like the sky bespangled with planets and the Moon and like a mass of multicoloured clouds adorned by a rainbow.
The whole  earth had been picturised on it. It was filled with rows of mountains  and a canopy of trees all over. The trees were filled with lovely flowers with petals and filaments drawn on them.
There were pictures of mansions white in colour and pools of crystalclear water filled with lovely flowers. There were pictures of beautiful lotuses drawn on it.
There, the great Hanuman indeed saw a splendid chariot called Pushpaka. It was glowing with glittering gems. Taller than the biggest mansion, it was a great chariot.
Inside were birds made of vaidurya, silver and corals. There were colourful serpents made of various gems, and highclass horses of exquisite limbs drawn.
It had curved figures of birds with beautiful wings carved out of corals and gold The wings were shining as if they were really the wings of allies of Cupid, the god of love.
He saw on it lotus ponds, artificial elephants with shapely trunks, offering to Laxmi who herself was a lotus, holding in her beautiful hands blue lotuses shining with filaments.
Thus he reached the auspicious palace appearing like a beautiful mountain and stood wonderstruck. Once again he looked at that beautiful palace which appeared like a mountain with lovely caverns in spring time filled with wonderful fragrance
Then Hanuman moved about that cherished city ruled by the strength of arms of the tenheaded king. Unable to find venerable Sita, who was deprived of the benefit of her husband's virtuous proximity, he became deeply sad.
Unable to find Sita, the disciplined and foresighted Hanuman, who always kept the righteous path, felt distressed while moving about, his mind oppressed by all kinds of thought.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventh sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The courageous son of the Windgod, Hanuman, the vanara saw the aerial chariot kept in the middle of the mansion inlaid with gems and diamonds latticed with artificial windows of barnished gold.
The immeasurable Pushpaka fashioned by Visvakarma with images of incomparable beauty was not possible to describe. An excellent  product of his achievement, it was placed in the aerial path appearing as a beaconlight (signpost) in the orbit of the Sun.
There was nothing in Pushpaka which was not executed carefully with special effort, nothing which was not made of precious stones. Such privileges were not available to even gods. Indeed there was nothing which was not unique.
(The Pushpaka) was designed by dint of divine efforts and prowess (of Kubera). It could touch any place its master commanded with a cool mind. It had many beautiful places of rest.
The Pushpaka was specially designed in a unique manner. It was decorated with many colourful peaks. It was delghtful and pleasing to the mind and bright like the autumnal fullmoon. It looked like a mountain with many wonderful towers around.
The Pushpaka was borne by multitudes of Bhutas whose faces were shining with earrings, who were demons ranging in the night sky. They were gluttons endowed with great speed, and they had big, rolling and frightening eyes.
That hero among monkeys, beheld the aerial chariot looking beautiful like a colourful collection of spring blossoms. Its appearance was more pleasant than spring itself.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eighth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The son of the Windgod, Hanuman, saw a huge, spacious and excellent of all mansions in the centre of the palace.
The mansion of the lord of demons was a conglomeration of palaces half a yojana long and half a yojana wide.
Hanuman, the subduer of enemies, went  around in search of  the largeeyed Vaidehi.
Searching the excellent residences of important demons, Hanuman finally reached  the palace of the lord of ogres guarded by armed demons with elephants with two or three or four tusks.
Hanuman entered the palace of Ravana crowded with shedemons who were the wives of Ravana and the princesses brought by him after winning them in wars. To Hanuman, it looked like an ocean filled with crocodiles, sharks, whales, and a variety of fishes and snakes tossed by the force of the wind.
Whatever wealth was possessed by Vaisravana (Kubera, the son of sage Vishrava) and also Indra who rides the Ucchaisrava green horse, was there in the palace of Ravana.
The wealth stored in Ravana's palace was akin to what lay in the palaces of Kubera, Yama or Varuna, and ever more exquisite.
Hanuman saw in the centre of that palace a complex of many wellbuilt houses.
There was a wonderful aerial chariot called Pushpaka embellished with all kinds of gems built by Visvakarma for Brahma. It was the same one that Kubera had won from his grandfather, the creator Brahma, through his supreme penance. The lord of ogres acquired it (as a memento for his victory) by defeating Kubera with his might.
It was supported by finely built pillars of two types of gold (Kartaswara and Hiranmaya) with images of wolves carved on them and blazing. It was tall as if scraping the sky and resembled mountains like Meru and Mandara. It was graced with multitudes of  auspicious and decorated pleasurehouses everywhere.
It was well built by Visvakarma and and had golden stairways, with radiant platforms glowing like fire and Sun.
It had latticed windows made of gold inlaid with crystals. The platforms were encrusted with saphires called Indraneela and Mahaneela appropriately.
It was shining bright with colourful corals, precious gems and peerless pearls fixed on its floor.
It was bright like molten gold, fragrant with red sandal comparable to the rising Sun.
Hanuman ascended the wonderful Pushpaka, welldecked with many corridors.
There he smelt the stupefying, unearthly odour of food and drink. He felt as though the fragrance had taken a potentially solid form.(Note: The wind has no form. But when he carried the aroma of food and drink it appeared like the personification of wind which could be smelt. गन्धवती पृथवी fragrance comes from earth पृथवीतत्त्व the poet transmits the same to the wind who has got only स्पर्श sense of touch).
The fragrance was as if inviting the mighty hero like a relative inviting his kith and kin, saying 'come here' and leading him to a place where Ravana rested.
Then he proceeded to an auspicious hall, which was Ravana's favourite like his chief queen dear to his heart.
The stairways of the mansion were inlaid with special gems, windows were latticed with gold, floors were covered with crystals, figures of ivory with silver.
It was decorated with pillars of silver and gold inlaid with pearls and corals and gems.
It had highly ornamented pillars all over, some slightly bent and others straight. With lofty columns looking like wings it appeared as if the mansion had started on its journey to heaven.
The floor was covered with a wide carpet spread from wall to wall with designs of different murals of many places and houses drawn in a row (garland like). The big carpet appeared like the expanse of earth itself.
The mansion was resounding with the noise of birds singing in heat. It had wonderful fragrance. It was laid with exquisite tapestries and served as a dwelling place for the king of demons.
It was smoky with fumes of agaru incence though spotless like a swan. It was colourful and radiant like Kamadhenu, the wishfulfilling cow, because of the offering of flowers.
(The mansion) was so full of effulgence and soul ravishing that it served as an adornment even to splendour. It looked as though it banished all sorrow and was a source of prosperity.
The chamber of Ravana, like a mother, gratified all the five senses of Hanuman with proper objects of the senses.
'This may be heaven or world of gods. It may be Amaravati, the abode of Indra or else it may be the supreme achievment (of the Creator), thought Maruti৷৷
Seeing the golden lamps that stood burning steadily, Hanuman thought they looked like  gamblers in deep thought defeated by expert  gamblers in a game of dice.
Hanuman fancied that the entire place was set ablaze with the glow of lamps, the lustre of Ravana and the brilliant glow of Ravana's ornaments (everything was shining).
He found thousands of beautiful women seated on carpets wearing different clothes and garlands and dressed in various attires.
Drinking and sporting until midnight, they had dropped off to sleeptired.
Fast asleep, sounds of their ornaments silenced, the young women looked like a large bed of lotuses with swans and bees sitting calm without their usual noise.
Hanuman looked at the faces of the wellbred young women with closed eyes and concealed teeth, fragrant like lotuses.
The faces of the women looked like blooming lotuses at daybreak, their petals closed up again at night.
The intoxicated bees would again and again long to enjoy these beautiful faces which were like blooming lotuses.
The illustrious Hanuman felt it to be correct to compare those faces with lotuses for their fragrance.
Brightened by (the beauty of) the maidens, the mansion shone like the autumnal sky endearing  and pleasing with stars.
The lord of demons surrounded by women shone like the beautiful Moon encircled by stars.
Seeing those women lying together Hanuman imagined them to be numerous meteors dropped from heaven after enjoying their merits, enjoyed and exhausted.
It was clear that the grace and lustre of those women looked brilliant like the lustre and grace of brilliant stars releasing an auspicious glow.
Garlands displaced and jewels scattered, they were drowsy due to drink and sexual exercise.
A few young women had their circular vermilion mark (on the forehead) smudged, some had their anklets loosened and a few had their necklaces.
Some had their strings of pearl broken, others had their clothes slipped off, and some had their waist belts snapped. They were like young mares fallen to rest after carrying heavy loads.
With their good eartops broken and flower garlands crushed some looked like blooming creepers in a dense forest crushed by mighty elephants.
The pearl chains, large and shining like rays of the Moon in the space between the breasts looked like sleeping swans.
The vaidurya worn by women (on the breasts) looked like Kadamba birds while the golden chains put on by some others appeared like ruddy geese.
Their hips were like river banks crowded with swans, karandava and Chakravaka birds shining like rivers.
With their tiny bells round their girdle looking like buds, the bold golden ornaments like lotuses, their gestures of love like crocodiles and their radiant beauty like silver banks, the women looked like smoky rivers.
The beautiful imprints made by the (heavy) ornaments on the tender limbs, breasts and nipples of some women appeared like many ornaments.
Shaken by the breath released from their mouths the fringes of the garments of some women were drawn towards their faces again and againfluttering.
The fringes of their garments glowing beautifully close to the faces of the wives (of Ravana) with different beautiful hues, shone splendid like flags.
The eartops of some women endowed with auspicious charm were swinging softly generating a gentle sound by the touch of their breath.
The sweet smell of wine emitted from their mouth and the natural fragrance of their breath was refreshing to Ravana  as if it was serving him at that time.
Some women of Ravana (overcome by blind passion) smelt again and again the mouths of their cowives next to them  assuming it to be Ravana's.
Even though the beautiful wives (should have been angry with their cowives for smelling their mouths) they behaved pleasingly, having no freedom to act with Ravana
Some women slept pillowed on their arms, laying aside their adornments and others had their garment under the head as pillows and lay in sleep.
Some women lay placing their arms on the breasts of the other while their own arms were used as pillow by another. One woman placed her head  on the lap of the other and slept.
Given to intoxication and sex, the women slept touching one another's thighs, sides, hips, back and lap of the other, with their limbs intertwined.
Knit with the shoulders of one another like a garland of flowers intertwined with the tipsy bees resting the women shone.
The women of Ravana appeared like a garden in spring. They were as if a cluster of  creepers blossomed in spring due to the caresses of the breeze. They were knit together as one string forming a garland, flowers of one creeper striking the other. The joints of these creepers had grown strong when tangled together. Shaken by the breeze, the bees resting on one creeper would go to the other.
It was not possible to distinguish clearly between their jewels, limbs, garments and garlands and to place them in the right spots.
When Ravana was happily asleep, the gods of light burning on the gold lampposts gazed without winking as it were, at the women, whom they dare  not gaze for fear of waking Ravana.
The women halled from the families of royal sages, ancestral deities, daityas and demons who were infatuated with him.
Many were brought by Ravana as captives of war and some came on their own deluded by lust.
Except Sita no other woman among them had been taken there by force. They were won only on account of his valour and virtues. None loved any one earlier and none was married to others.
None among them was born of a lowly family, nor lacked beauty, kindness, skill, strength or brightness. No one was not lovable to Ravana.
'If the lawful wife of Rama born of a good family can be allowed to remain with Rama in the same way as the consorts of the lord of demons, how fortunate it would be, thought the wise lord of monkeys'.
Hanuman once again assuming his true form said to himself, 'Sita is surely a virtuous lady superior to and more distinguished than them all. Alas, this lord of Lanka committed an ignoble, act (by abducting her).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे नवमस्सर्गः।Thus ends the ninth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Looking around, Hanuman noticed a bed chamber, with a heavenly dais on which he saw a couch encrusted with crystals, vaidurya, and inlaid with colourful ivory and gold. It had an exquisite rich covering.
Hanuman saw an umbrella in one spot decorated with the best of garlands. The white umbrella looked like the Moon, lord of stars.
He saw an exquisite couch made of gold shining wonderfully like the Sun. It was decorated with ashoka flowers. Women were holding fans of chamari deer. It was upholstered with the best of bedspreads made of soft sheep skin and adorned with beautiful strings of flower garlands. Scented with aromatic smoke, it was refreshed with fragrance which had spread all over the place.
Hanuman saw the mightyarmed, heroic lord of demons, sleeping with huge bloodshot eyes looking like a cloud, he was adorned with flashing earrings, and clad in robes of silver texture. His body was smeared with red sandal paste of sweet fragrance. Therefore, he looked like a cloud reddened by twilight and flashing with the lightning of his ornaments. He was handsome and could assume any form at will. He looked like Mandara mountain surrounded thickly with  trees and wild bushes. Decked with exquisite ornaments, he was sleeping after dalliance at night on that glittering couch. He was the beloved of the ogresses and bringer of joy to them
Hanuman saw the mightyarmed, heroic lord of demons, sleeping with huge bloodshot eyes looking like a cloud, he was adorned with flashing earrings, and clad in robes of silver texture. His body was smeared with red sandal paste of sweet fragrance. Therefore, he looked like a cloud reddened by twilight and flashing with the lightning of his ornaments. He was handsome and could assume any form at will. He looked like Mandara mountain surrounded thickly with  trees and wild bushes. Decked with exquisite ornaments, he was sleeping after dalliance at night on that glittering couch. He was the beloved of the ogresses and bringer of joy to them
Having reached Ravana, who was breathing (hissing) like a snake, Hanuman was for a moment frightened and drew away from him as if he was put to terrible fear.
The great vanara ascended the stairway and reached another altar and once again looked at the sleeping Ravana, the tiger among demons.
While the lord of demons lay asleep on the magnificent couch, he  looked like the Prasravana hill with its elephant in rut.
Hanuman saw the great Ravana's arms, which were like a pair of Indra's flag staff adorned with golden straps. The arms bore the marks of wounds caused by Airavata, (Indra's elephant), torn by the thunderbolt of Indra in war, and wounded by the discus of Lord Visnu. His strong, fleshy, wellbuilt arms, having auspicious thumbnails, shapely fingers and palms, pressed together, resembled the iron crowbars or beam used for main doors. The arms resembled elephant's trunks, tossed on a clean bed, resembling two fivehooded snakes (fingers like hoods), besmeared with cool, fragrant, red sandalpaste of excellent quality which looked red like the hare's blood. They were well massaged  by the best of women with fine, fragrant sandal paste. They were the arms which could make yakshas, pannagas, gods and demons roar in fear at their sight.
The vanara, gazed at the arms of Ravana placed on the couch that appeared like two angry snakes asleep in a cave on (the lap) of mount Mandara.
The lord of demons looked splendid like a mountain with his long, fully developed arms. He appeared like Mandara mountain with two lofty peaks.
The breath released from the huge mouth of that lion of demons carried the fragrance of mango and punnaga as well as excellent Bakula flowers. It exuded the aroma of rich and delicious food and different drink. It was as though pervading the whole chamber.
Hanuman saw Ravana, whose face was lit up by his earrings. His shining headgear studded with gold and pearls was set aside. His fleshy, broad chest on which the pearl necklace had slightly receded from its position(as he was asleep)  was shining along with the red sandal paste. He had put on a splendid white silken cloth which had also slipped a little and was covered with exquisitely  rich yellow upper garment. His eyes were bloodred. His body was comparable to a heap of blackbeans. He was sighing heavily like a hissing snake. He appeared like an elephant sleeping on the banks of the great river Ganges. With four golden lamps glowing on four sides of the bed,the four directions were illuminated. All his limbs lit up bright (with the glow of lamps), he looked like a cloud with streaks of lightning. His dear wives were seen resting at his feet in the palace of the lord of demons.
Hanuman, the leader of vanaras found the wives of Ravana,  whose  faces were bright as the Moon, adorned with beautiful earrings and fresh floral garlands.
Hanuman saw  the women there wearing fine jewellery, performing dances, playing musical instruments, and resting on the lap or leaning on the arms of the demon king.
He noticed on the earlobes of the the women gold earrings decked with diamonds and vaidurya. They were wearing shining armlets of gold.
There the beautiful moonlike faces of women Illumined by the lovely earrings lay on the cot which looked resplendent like the sky lit up with hosts of stars.
Exhausted by drinking and indulging in amorous sport, the consorts of Ravana slept here and there with their visible slender waists.
Another woman exceedingly beautiful and a delicate danseuse of beautiful complexion and rhythmic movements held her limbs in a dancing posture (though asleep) due to her habit .
Another woman slept hugging her veena. She shone like a lotus plant flung in a large river, clinging on to a boat. (Veena is compared to a boat and the woman to a lotusplant in the ambience of flowing waters of the river. The entire hall had put up such a dynamic view showing hectic life of the inmates).
A woman with dark eyes asleep with a drum placed in her armpit looked like a beautiful mother holding her loving baby (the drum was hung to her arm with a rope).
Another charming beauty endowed with beautiful breasts lay hugging a tambourine as though a passionate woman lay embracing her lover whom she secured after a long time.
Yet another lotuseyed lady slept embracing a lute as if a lovelorn woman lay clasping her lover.
Another selfpossessed lady, graceful in dance, holding a sevenstringed lute  was as though lying asleep with her beloved.
Another lady with drunken eyes lay fast asleep holding a drum close to her beautiful bosom with her soft limbs. (These images show that these women were singing and dancing till late night and slept exhausted).
Another lady of slender belly, who had been exhausted by drunkeness was lying with a tabor pressed to her bosom and inserted in her armpit.
One lovely woman and another held a drum and slept as if they were hugging their young child.
Yet another with her eyes like lotus petals deluded with passion tightly held in her arms a musical instrument known as Adambaram and slept.
Another lovely lady was fast asleep, having turned a goblet of water  aside, yet another lay like a garland of variegated flowers in spring season.
Overcome with sleep another woman lay pressing with her own hands her golden gobletlike breasts.
One woman with eyes like lotus petals and face like the fullmoon embraced another young woman of beautiful hips  and slept tipsy with drink.
Some charming maidens held wonderful musical instruments pressing against their bosom and slept like passionate women embracing their loved ones.
Hanuman saw some maidens lying on separate excellent beds, women richly  endowed with beautysleeping.
Then the vanara saw  a very beautiful woman of golden complexion decked with pearls and gems and with ornaments as if illuminating the excellent mansion with her splendour She was the king's favourite and the chief queen, Mandodari.
On seeing her embellished with ornaments, beauty and charm, the long armed son of the Windgod, the chief of the vanaras thought her to be Sita and rejoiced.
He rejoiced clapping his palms, kissing his tail and jumping up, climbing up the pillars and jumping down on the ground in joy. Thus he exhibited his monkey nature.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे दशमस्सर्गः।Thus ends the tenth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The great vanara, having rejected his judgement, started thinking again.
'Lovely Sita, being away from Rama, will not sleep, will not eat or drink or adorn herself. How can she approach any other man even if he is the king of gods for there is none equal to Rama even among gods'. Having thus decided, Hanuman strolled about the banquet hall.
Some women were fatigued after sporting, similarly some were exhausted after singing. Others were tired through dancing and some were worn out by continuous drinking.
Some women reclined on tabors, some on murajas, and some on drums and hassocks while some slept on excellent couches.
The monkey leader saw thousands of  beautiful women asleep after long dalliance. Some of them were adorned with ornaments, some were good at arguments and versed in the appreciation of songs, some were aware of the appropriate time and place and some were adept in right expressions.
In the midst of these women the longarmed lord of demons shone like a (majestic) bull in a big cowshed.
Surrounded by the women, the demon king shone like a proud elephant attended by many female elephants scattered in a dense forest.
The tiger among vanaras saw at the great Ravana's palace a drinking place where everything one desires was provided.
There at the drinking hall the meat of deer, buffaloes and boars portioned and placed.
The tiger among vanaras also saw there meat of peacocks and chicken placed in large golden vessels, some half eaten.
Hanuman saw the meat of pigs and jungle fowls, deer, peacocks and bones marinated with yoghurt and special kinds of salt.
He saw several kinds of (nonvegetarian) food like cooked meat of fowls, ruddy geese, buffaloes, goats, fishes as well as food for licking. (Food is of four kinds  1) भक्ष्य which can be chewed 2) भोज्य ordinary solid, semisolid food which can be consumed  3) लेह्य food for licking  4) चोष्य liquid food (which can be sipped)).
The banquet hall looked splendid with food seasoned with salt and sour ingredients. There was ragashadavas (syrup made with grapes, pomegranates, different juices like half ripe mangoes and seasoned with ginger cardomom, butter etc). Heavy chains, anklets and shouldersstraps were thrown aside. (The people relaxed while eating and drinking and discarded heavy ornaments). Many glasses were found scattered or drinks spilt on the floor after use.Many fruits and flowers were kept.
Good couches and different kinds of seats were wellarranged in the banquet hall. The place appeared as if it was glowing witout fire.
In the banquet hall there were many types of meat arranged in a number of ways. They were cooked by experts by seasoning them with choicest ingredients.
There were many types of wonderful and pleasing wine extracted from sugarcane, honey , fruits and flowers. They were good even though fermented and made delicious by seasoning with aromatic spices.
(The banquet hall) appeared beautiful with many kinds of garlands arranged in different locations. Also there were vessels made of pure gold, crystalware and jars spread all over.
Hanuman saw the best of wines in large quantities kept in silver and pure gold pots.
The great monkey saw the wine jars made of gold and silver studded with crystals and gems.
He saw wine jars at one place, some fully drained, and at another place not touched at all.
He moved about looking at different types of eatables and drinks arranged separately along with the left over food.
At some places he saw broken pots, at other places rolling pots and elsewhere flower garlands strewn and mixed up with water and fruits.
Hanuman saw many beds some unused and some occupied by lovely women sleeping, embracing one another.
Overcome with sleep some women pulled clothes of other women and covered their bodies with them.
The lovely clothes and garlands on the bodies of women were moving mildly by their exhalations as if shaken by the gentle breeze.
With the many scents of cool sandal, of sweetsmelling wines of diverse kinds, as well as flower garlands of several types and of incense burning in that hall, the cool wind blew spreading several fragrances all over.
The wind wafting through the Pushpaka chariot carried the fragrance of the cool sandalpaste used in bath and the sweet smell of wines and thick smoke of fragrance spread further.
There in the demons abode were women who were fair, some lovely with dark and others with golden complexion.
Withered due to indulgence in sex they were overcome with sleep. The charm of the women was like the lotus creepers with closed lotuses .
Brilliant Hanuman ransacked the harem of Ravana but found no Janaki.
The great monkey was very much worried as he thought he had transgressed the moral code by watching the women.
'Observing the wives of others in this manner in their inner chambers very much amounts to transgression of moral code  by me'. ( thought he)
'I did see these wives of another, but not with a sensual mind. I have only seen them but not with foul intention'.
Another  bright idea struck the highly sensible Hanuman, who had a clear vision of the task ahead-- 'I was firm and singleminded in my direction regarding the task ahead' (thought he).
'It is true I saw all the loyal wives of Ravana but without any foul desire. Indeed in my mind no passionate feeling was ever aroused'.
'Mind propels the sense organs to do good or bad deeds. (But) my mind is firmly esatablished in righteousness'.
'It is not possible for me to look for Vaidehi elsewhere. During such search operations one always looks for women among women.'
'One has to search a creature among its own species. It is not possible to find a lost woman in the herd of female deer'.
'I searched all over Ravana's harem with a pure mind but I have not seen Janaki'.
Even while valiant Hanuman was looking among the daughters of gods, gandharvas and nagas he could not find Janaki.
Heroic Hanuman, unable to find Sita among the women, moved aside and started thinking.
Illustrious Hanuman left the banquet hall to renew his effort in search of Sita.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकादशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eleventh sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Anxious to find Sita, Hanuman revisited the bowers of creepers, picture galleries and domitories located in the midst of the mansion, but  did not find that beautiful Sita.
The great monkey, unable to find the beloved of Rama thought Sita might not be surviving. So he started thinking, ' I could not see her even though I have searched all over'.
'Janaki, follower of noble path, anxious to protect her chastity must have been killed by the wicked demon king.
'The daughter of Janaka might have collapsed out of fear, looking at the distorted faces of ugly, tall and monstrous demon maids of Ravana.
'I have spent a long time with vanaras. I have not  succeded in my efforts to find Sita. I dare not see Sugriva now without finding Sita and without fulfilling my task. Sugriva will punish me severely. There is no way out.'
'I have searched all over the harem. Ravana's women have been seen. (Yet) I have not been able to see noble Sita. My efforts have been wasted'.
'What will the vanaras say when I return? What should I speak when they ask me: O hero, what did you accomplish there?'
'Since the time limit has exceeded and Janaki is not spotted, surely the vanaras would sit and wait unto death. What am I going to say'?
'What will the elderly Jambavan say? What will young prince Angada and other vanaras collected there say when I reach the seashore to meet them'.
Wise Hanuman once again declared, 'being free from despair is the root cause of prosperity. Freedom from despondency gives supreme happiness and leads to success'.
'The action of a living being certainly bears fruit. Therefore, I shall put forth my best effort without feeling despondent. I will once again search everywhere in Lanka ruled  by Ravana'.
'I have searched the banquet halls, bowers of creepers, picture galleries and gymnasiums. I have searched everywhere through the paths of gardens and mansions, harems and the Pushpaka chariot also.
Thinking thus, he started searching once again the basement cells, temples, homes within homes.
The great vanara searched all over again and again jumping up and down, stopping for a while and moving, opening and closing doors, by crossing, entering and exiting, jumping up and down. Thus he moved about and searched whereever there was scope to search
Even a space of four fingers in the inner chambers of Ravana was not left out in his search for Sita.
He moved in the lanes inside the boundary walls, around the shrines, altars, wells and tanks whereever it was possible to look for.
Hanuman could see only ogresses of different typesugly, deformed but could not find the daughter of Janaka.
Hanuman could see even the women of vidyadharas who were matchless in beauty among women in the world but not Janaki the beloved of Raghava.
Hanuman could see there moonfaced daughters of nagas with charming limbs but not the slimwaisted Sita.
Hanuman saw the daghters of nagas kidnapped by Ravana forcibly after victory in war but not Sita, the delight of Janaka.
The longarmed Hanuman, son of the Windgod was able to see other great women but not Sita. So he became despondent.
The son of the Wind god, the great monkey realised the futility of his efforts in crossing the sea. He brooded again.
Hanuman, son of the Windgod, came out of the aerial chariot, mind stricken with grief and started thinking again.इत्यार्षे  श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्वादशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the twelfth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hanuman, the vanara leader, jumped from the aerial chariot to the boundary wall like a flash of lightning in the clouds.
Going round the palace of Ravana, unable to see Janaka's daughter Sita, Hanuman spoke thus to himself:
"I have thoroughly surveyed the entire city of Lanka to please Rama, but I am unable to find Sita of flawless beauty.
"I have searched for Sita thoroughly in waterlogs, lakes, tanks, streams and rivers and all over the woods and among mountains that are difficult to reach. I have searched all over the land but have not been able to find Janaki.
"Sampati, king of vultures had said that Sita is at Ravana's palace. But I have not been able to see her.
"Can it be that Mythili, daughter of Janaka, dejected and helpless succumbed to the evil intentions of Ravana.
"Or, perhaps she might have been dropped midway from the hold of Ravana while he was flying at great speed, afraid of the deadly arrows of Rama?
"Or, perhaps while being borne away on the path frequented by siddhas, the beloved of Rama might have fallen down (dead), heart broken, on seeing the (vast) sea.
"He thinks, on account of the high speed during the flight of Ravana under the pressure of his arms, the noble, largeeyed lady might have given up her life.
"Surely, she might have fallen into the sea while wriggling in her effort to extricate herself from the hold of Ravana as he was flying over the sea.
"Oh poor Sita, distanced from relations, while protecting her chastity helplessly she might have been devoured by cruel Ravana.
"Or else, the pious, blackeyed Sita might have been eaten by the the cruelnatured wives of the lord of demons.
"Or, she might have attained death, meditating on Rama, whose face resembles the fullmoon and eyes the lotus petals.
"Or, Vaidehi, the princess of Mithila might have cast off her life grieving intensely and crying, 'Alas, Rama, alas, Lakshmana, alas, Ayodhya'. (Mithila is the name of the  capital city and Videha is the country which was ruled by Janaka. Sita, the princess is known as Vaidehi, Mythili and Janaki).
"Or, I think Sita might have been imprisoned in a cage like a myna in Ravana's palace. She will be surely crying.
"How could Janaki, the daughter of Janaka, Rama's wife, the lady with a beautiful waist and eyes like lotus petals, come under the fold of Ravana?
"Whether Janaki is lost or irretrievable or dead is not known The news should not be  reported to Rama, who is very fond of his wife.
"To carry or not to carry this news to Rama would be a mistake. What shall I do? I am facing a tough situation.
"I wonder what the right course of action is when things have taken such a turn? What is proper for me to do? Hanuman once again deliberated.
"If I return to Kishkinda without seeing Sita of what use is my effort? What have I accomplished? What will happen? (Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha are the four Purusharthas or accomplishments in life)
"My crossing the ocean, my entry into Lanka and my survey of the demons are all futile.
"What will Sugriva or even the vanaras and the two sons of Dasaratha say when I reach Kishkinda?
"If I report the most unpleasant news that Sita was not found, Rama will give up his life.
"Seeing Rama in such a painful state, wise Lakshmana who has given his life to Rama, to whom he is deeply devoted will also not survive.
"On hearing the death of both the brothers Bharata will also die. On seeing this Satrughna will also not live.
"On seeing that Rama has ended his life, the grateful and truthful monkey leader, Sugriva will give up his life.
"Distressed, disheartened, pained and grieved on account of her husband's death, the virtuous lady Ruma (wife of Sugriva) will be unhappy and die.
"Tara who is troubled by Vali's death and tortured with grief will not live when king Sugriva dies.
"On account of his parents death and also because of Sugriva's calamity, Angada will give up his life.
"The grief due to the death of their king will make the vanaras hit their heads with their palms and fists.
"The vanaras who were reared by the king's kind words, gifts and care will give up their life.
"The chiefs among vanaras together will not enjoy their life in the forest or mountains or caves.
"Tormented by their king's death the vanaras with their wives, sons and ministers will drop down from the mountain peaks on the rough ground and die.
"The vanaras will put an end to their lives by poisoning or by hanging or by selfimmolation or by killing themselves with weapons or by fasting unto death.
"If I go there (without finding Sita), it will cause destruction of the Ikshvakus and vanaras would weep. It would be dreadful.
"I will not go to the city of Kishkinda from here or to Sugriva without finding Mythili. It will not be possible for me to face him.
Both the highsouled warrior princes treading a righteous path as well as the vanaras will survive with a hope of my return if I stay back.
"If Janaki is not found I will stay here and live like a hermit subsisting on whatever is available on this sea shore, which has abundance of roots, fruits and water.
"I will prepare a pyre  and enter the fire  so that sea waves wash off the ashes or crows and beasts will eat up my body while i sit fasting unto death.
"I shall enter water and drown myself to death if I am not able to find Janaki. I think this way of ending life has been suggested by great ascetics.
My glory which had a good start (in the form of bringing Rama to Sugriva) and brought fortune to Sugriva and fame to me has been snapped as I could not find Sita.
"I will remain an ascetic and do penance under the tree practising selfcontrol and not go back without seeing the blackeyed Sita.
"Besides, if I go back without finding Sita all the vanaras including Angada will die.
"If I commit suicide, I will earn numerous sins. By being alive, I can witness auspicious events. Therefore, I will live, for, happiness can come only to the living.
The elephant among monkeys (Hanuman) worrying over and over again, holding his head for long could not reach the end of his grief.
"I will kill Ravana, this mighty, tenheaded demon. Sita was indeed carried away by him. This (killing him) can be a fitting reply to his evil action. My desire would be fulfilled.
"Or else, I shall carry him across the sea and put him before Rama like a bull as if he is a sacrificial prey to lord Siva."
Distressed over his inability to find Sita, Hanuman's mind was overcome with anxiety and he started thinking further.
"Till I find the virtuous Sita, wife of Rama in this Lanka, I shall keep searching everywhere again and again.
"Had I brought Raghava following  the words of Sampati, Rama would have burnt all vanaras unable to find his wife.
"I will stay here itself, restricting my food and controlling my senses. Let not men and monkeys perish for my fault.
"Here is the Ashoka grove with huge trees. I will go there. I have not looked for her in this place.
"I shall offer salutations to Vasus, Rudras Adityas and Aswinis and proceed to  increase (cause) the sorrow of the demons. (There are eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, two Ashwins and fortynine Windgods).
"I will conquer all the ogres and pass them to Sita, the delight of the Ikshvaku family  as an offering and give Rama to her as the fruit of her austerities."
The brilliant son of the Windgod, Hanuman, whose senses were overwhelmed with worries, regained his senses in a short while and got up.
"My salutations to Lakshmana, Rama and divine daughter of Janaka. Salutations to Rudra, Indra, Yama and Vayu. Salutations to Sun, Moon and Maruts"
Having offered salutations to all gods as well as to Sugriva, he looked at all quarters and left for the Ashoka grove.
Hanuman started thinking again about his task after reaching the auspicious Ashoka grove.
'This Ashoka grove filled with many trees, guarded by many demons is carefully tended. It must be sacred.
"The guards posted there are surely protecting the grove. The divinity  pervading all over me (the wind) must also have been controlled as it is also not blowing violently. I have turned my body small for Rama's cause and also to save myself from Ravana.
May all sages, gods, the selfborn Brahma, Windgod, Indra, the wielder of thunderbolt whose name is invoked in sacrifices, Yama, who carries a rope, Varuna give success and Lord Siva help me. May the Sun, Moon, Aswinis  Marutas assist me. May the gods of the quarters and the lord of all beings help me to succeed. May those whom I could not see also bring success to me.
'Oh when and how would I behold that beautiful noble lady of stainless character, with a Moonlike face, prominent nose, white teeth, pleasant smile and with eyes like lotus petals?
"How will I set my eyes on that gentle, frail and suffering thing now, who has been abducted by that mean, cruel sinner of dreadful look?"इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रयोदशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the thirteenth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Mighty Hanuman lost in thought for a moment, jumped down (the harem) to the boundary wall of the palace.
Standing on the boundary wall, the great vanara contracted his body and observed the blossoms on several tree tops---- Salas, lovely Ashoka trees and blossoms of champak, uddalaka, naga, mangoes with their fruits crimson as the snout of a monkey, it being the beginning of Spring.
He penetrated like an arrow released from a bow the cluster of trees covering mango grove and overgrown with hundreds of creepers.
Entering deep into the grove, Hanuman saw clusters of trees pleasing to look at, herds of animals and flocks of colourful birds singing melodious notes.The grove was surrounded on all sides by silvery and golden trees which looked colourful with flocks of birds and herds of deer. It was full of lovely thickets looking like the rising sun. It was fringed with various trees bearing abundance of fruits and flowers. It was inhabited by intoxicated cuckoos, bees,  proud peacocks and numerous lovely birds.
The vanara who went searching for the paragon of virtue born of a noble family, awakened the birds who were happily asleep in their nests.
As the birds flew away, the trees hit by the wings of birds showered flowers of different colours.
Covered with flowers, Hanuman shone like a mountain of flowers in the midst of Ashoka grove.
Beholding that sprightly monkey running in all directions, its body covered with variegated blossoms fallen from the trees, all living beings there thought that it was Spring personified
Strewn with flowers of various colours fallen from the trees of various kinds, the goddess of earth looked charming like a young woman profusely bedecked.
Shaken vigorously by Hanuman of great speed, the trees shed their blooms of variegated colours.
The tree tops, shorn of their leaves and flowers and fruits fallen, appeared like gamblers who had lost their stakes and had to lay down their clothes and ornaments.
Shaken by the swift Hanuman, even the big trees dropped flowers, fruits and leaves.
Deserted by the flocks of birds resting on them (flowers and leaves also dropped from branches), the trees were left bare with trunks unable to move.
The garden of Ashoka with trees shattered and crushed by Hanuman's tail,  hands and feet, appeared like a woman with dishevelled hair, with her vermilion mark effaced, her bright teeth and lips faded for being kissed and wounded with nails and bitten with teeth (by her lover).
Hanuman shook with tremendous speed the huge clusters of creepers hanging there just like stormy wind in rainy season scatters masses of clouds on the Vindhya mountain.
Roaming there the monkey noticed the beautiful floors paved with gems, gold and silver৷৷
He observed ponds of different shapes filled with clear water with steps paved with rich gems, with sands of pearls and corals and bottoms of crystal, which  contained beds of lotuses in bloom, adorned with chakravaka birds and resonant with cacklings of swans and sarasas and vatyuhas rubbing their beaks. There were golden platforms built on banks and platforms built of crystals. There were trees on the bank of streams, and nectarlike sacred waters flowing in them surrounded by hundreds of creepers, and Ashoka blossoms scattered everywhere, with thickly grown bushes of different kinds, with lilies in bloom in tanks.
The tiger among monkeys beheld a delightingful mountain, resembling the raincloud with tall, pleasing peaks, wonderful peaks spread all over the mountain. There were caves built of stone, with a variety of trees.
Hanuman, the great monkey saw a stream descending from the hill which looked like a beloved jumping down from the thighs of her lover. It was adorned with trees whose boughs touched the water and thus looking like an angry woman leaving her dear lover but detained by her relatives. With the water running backward in circles it appeared as if the beloved has returned to her lover pleased.
Not far from there, Hanuman, son of the Windgod sighted lotus ponds filled with different kinds of water birds.
Hanuman saw an oblong pond, full of cool water provided with steps, embellished with gems and beautified with pearl dust as sand on its bank.  Thronged with many kinds of animals, it looked colourful with large mansions constructed by Visvakarma in the artificial woodlands decorated all over.
There the trees had abundance of flowers and fruits. A few trees were full of leaves and branches spread like parasols. There were raised golden platforms.
The monkey leader saw one simsupa tree covered all over with canopies of many climbers and leaves. The tree was surrounded by golden platforms.
He beheld several pieces of land and streams flowing out of the springs. He also noticed golden trees asresplendent as fire.
He saw trees resplendent with golden radiance and thought that he was in the midst of gold like the Sungod getting golden hue by the radiance of Meru, the golden mountain.
Hanuman was wonderstruck to hear the sound produced by rows of golden trees which stood round the simsupa tree. This sound resembled the tinkling of a hundred anklets when the wind passed through (their leaves).
Strongarmed Hanuman climbed up the simsupa tree shining with flowers on its top and surrounded by tender sprouts and leaves. (He said to himself):
"I may see by chance( from this point) Vaidehi tormented with grief anxiously waiting to see Rama while moving about here and there casually.
"Surely this beautiful Ashoka grove with delightful champak, chandan and bakula trees belongs to the wicked Ravana."
"This lovely lotuspond is frequented by flocks of aquatic birds. Surely Rama's queen Janaki will come to this place.
"Beautiful Janaki, beloved queen of Rama loves to wander in forests. She will surely visit this grove.
"Or may be that doeeyed noble lady brooding over Rama will come to this garden she   is familiar with.
"That lovelyeyed queen tormented with grief over separation from Rama will be coming here to stay as she always loves strolling in the forest.
"The daughter of Janaka, the  chaste wife of Rama,  used to for the company of those creatures wandering in the forest.
Surely that lady of lovely complexion, the beautiful Janaki will come to this river flowing with sacred waters for performing the evening rituals.
To the auspicious Sita,the beloved of Rama, the lord of the world, this Ashoka grove is a befitting place.
"The moonfaced queen will certainly come to this stream of  auspicious water if she is surviving."
Pondering thus, the highsouled Hanuman remained concealed on the tree loaded with flowers and leaves and waited, looking eagerly for the wife of the lord of the people. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुर्दशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the fourteenth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hanuman looked out from the simsupa tree all around for Mythili scanning the ground below.
Hanuman surveyed from the Simsupa tree the Ashoka grove of trees full of fine fragrance. It looked welldecorated  like the Nandana garden of Indra. It teemed with animals and birds. It was filled with the voices of the cuckoos. It had tall mansions and underground chamber. There were golden lilies and lotuses in the lakes, enchanting couches with rich coverings and trees full of blossoms of all seasons and fruits in abundance With the  Ashoka tree shedding showers of flowers from time to time the place shone with the splendour of Sunrise. It glittered like inflamed fire. The Ashoka tree had  hundreds of colourful birds on the branches. It appeared as if it had branches without leaves which made them look like earornaments (of the grove). Ashoka flowers in bloom hung down to the base of the tree as if to take away the grief of the onlookers. The blossoms of the Karnikara and kimsuka brightened the whole grove.
Hanuman surveyed from the Simsupa tree the Ashoka grove of trees full of fine fragrance. It looked welldecorated  like the Nandana garden of Indra. It teemed with animals and birds. It was filled with the voices of the cuckoos. It had tall mansions and underground chamber. There were golden lilies and lotuses in the lakes, enchanting couches with rich coverings and trees full of blossoms of all seasons and fruits in abundance With the  Ashoka tree shedding showers of flowers from time to time the place shone with the splendour of Sunrise. It glittered like inflamed fire. The Ashoka tree had  hundreds of colourful birds on the branches. It appeared as if it had branches without leaves which made them look like earornaments (of the grove). Ashoka flowers in bloom hung down to the base of the tree as if to take away the grief of the onlookers. The blossoms of the Karnikara and kimsuka brightened the whole grove.
The grove shone bright as if it were inflamed fire with beautiful trees like purnaga, saptaparna, champak and uddalaka in full bloom.
There were thousands of ashoka trees some of which shone like gold, others like the flames of fire and some dark as collyrium.
The grove with different types of gardens spread over looked like the Nandana garden of Indra and Chaitraratha garden of Kubera. It surpassed every other garden. It was unimaginable in splendour. It was divine and delightful filled with the radiance of countless varieties of blossoms shining like stars, like a second firmament. It was like another ocean filled with precious gems of flowers. It had trees with flowers of honeyscented fragrance. Sounds of animals and birds filled the air. It was pleasing to the heart with various divine fragrances wafted (by the breeze)৷৷
The monkey leader saw a lofty templelike structure in the midst of the Ashoka grove which was highly fragrant and appeared like another indescribable structure that stood on a thousand pillars like another Gandhamadana mountain. It gleamed white like mount Kailasa. Its stairs were paved with corals. The altars were made of brightly polished gold. This structure glowing with brilliance was as if stealing the eyes. It looked white with light and lofty as though scratching the sky.
Then he beheld a lady surrounded by female demons. Clad in soiled clothes she looked dejected, emaciated through fasting and was sighing repeatedly. She appeared thin and pale like the crescent Moon at the beginning of the bright fortnight.
Her form was faintly recognisable. She had a lovely radiance on account of her beautiful form. She looked like the tip of burning fire engulfed in a cloud of smoke.
She was wearing an excellent single yellow cloth which was soiled. Unadorned, she looked like a muddy lotuspond bereft of lotuses.
She was bashful, tormented with agony, dejected with a withered look. She appeared like the star Rohini oppressed by planet Mars.
Her face was filled with tears. She looked dejected and emaciated due to fasting. Always plunged in grief, she looked like one meditating in tears.
Unable to see her dear kith and kin, she sat guarded by ogresses. She appeared like a doe separated from the herd and encircled by a pack of hounds.
She (from behind) appeared like the earth covered with a range of trees at the end of rainy season with her single long black braid touching her hips looking like a black serpent. She who deserved to be happy and had not experienced worries was burning in grief. (एकवेणी is a trait of a प्रोषितभर्तृका Sita who was forced to stay in Lanka was a प्रोषितभर्तृका नायिका.)
After seeing the largeeyed lady worn out and dressed in soiled clothes, Hanuman started deliberating in himself and guessed it was Sita for strong reasons.
Beholding the form of the largeeyed lady, Hanuman guessed, 'This is similar to the form seen while the demon was kidnapping her'.
Her face resembled the fullmoon which dispelled the encircling gloom by its radiance. She had a slender waist, beautiful round breasts, shapely eyebrows, red lips, dark hair, and eyes like lotus petals with attractive limbs. She was comparable to Rati, consort of Cupid.
Just as the radiance of the full moon is cherished by all, this lady was liked by every one in this world. With her lovely figure she was seated on the ground like an austere ascetic.
The timid lady was hissing (sighing) like the consort of the serpent king, who being caught in a widespread cobweb of grief was looking gloomy.
She was like the flames of fire obscured by smoke. She appeared like the text of Smriti of doubtful meaning, a treasure that has been thrown away
She was like faith shattered, hope frustrated, desires blocked by obstacles, success vitiated, fame marred and intellect blurred.
She appeared like fame besmirched by false allegation. She was pained by the obstruction to meet Rama and emaciated by  abduction.
The fawneyed lady was looking here and there with her dark, curved eyelashes. Her unhappy face was streaming with tears.
Covered with dirt and mud and shorn of adornments even though she deserved them, she looked wretched like the radiance of the Moon muffled by dark clouds.
Hanuman did recognise Sita after looking at her carefully again and again even as one is able to make out knowledge of shastriclore forgotten with lapse of time and lack of practice.
Just as an unclear expression which has undergone certain changes in meaning due to lack of usage over a long period is understood by virtue of previous practice so also Hanuman had difficulty in recognising Sita who was devoid of any decoration.
After close observation of different signs and deliberation with reasons he came to the conclusion that the largeeyed lady is the same blameless princess Sita.
Hanuman observed the ornaments worn by Vaidehi adding grace to her limbs which Rama had described.They were wellcrafted earrings and wellfit Savdamshtras. He noticed wonderful, variegated ornaments of corals and gems as well as those worn on hands. They were blackened for long wear and Sita had marks of wearing them on her body.(Note: This is a pair ornaments shaped like dog's teeth. It is not known on which part of the body they were worn).
"I think these ornaments are the same that were described by Rama. Those dropped (by Sita) are not found on her body. These were not dropped.There is no doubt."
"The shining yellow upper garment like a golden cloth was torn. Flung down, it stuck to a tree which the monkeys noticed.
"The jingling, choice ornaments were thrown down on the ground.
"This cloth worn long is crumpled. Even then it has retained its shine and looks fresh.
"This lady of golden complexion is Rama's beloved queen who does not disappear from his mind, although away.
"She is that same lady for whom Rama has been passing through compassion, benevolence, grief and passion. He is compassionate considering her a woman, kind and benevolent since she is his dependent, stricken with grief for losing a wife and passionate since she is his beloved.
"This blackeyed Sita and her divine,  charming body with perfect limbs are a match for Rama's figure.
"The divine queen's mind is firmly fixed on Rama and his mind, fixed on her. For this reason she and the righteous self (Rama) are able to survive till this moment.
"Lord Rama had accomplished a difficult task in sustaining the body this way without allowing it to sink and perish during separation from her.
"Rama, the strongarmed hero has accomplished a difficult task by surviving even for a moment without this Sita who has intoxicating lustre".
Hanuman, the bull among monkeys, admired the laudable Sita and the virtuous Rama and once again began to lament.
Sagacious Hanuman, eyes dimmed with tears, thought for a short while on the plight of Sita and lamented
"If Sita, who is worshipped by righteous Lakshmana and loved by Rama is tortured like this, it shows it is difficult to trangress the force of time.
"Just as river Ganga is not agitated by the rainbearing clouds, this Sita is not perturbed as she is aware of the prowess of Rama and might of Lakshmana.
"Sri Rama matches Vaidehi perfectly in character, age, behaviour, birth and auspicious signs. She is aware that he is the right person for her. Rama deserves Vaidehi and this blackeyed lady deserves him."
On seeing her glowing like fresh gold resembling goddess Lakshmi who is dear to the entire world, and thinking of Rama, Hanuman said:
"It was for the sake of this largeeyed Sita that the powerful Vali and the heroic Kabandha who was equal to Ravana in heroism were killed.
"Rama  killed Viradha of fearsome valour in the forest like Sambara by Indra.
"Ogres like Khara and Trisira and the powerful Dooshana were kileed in battle by Rama endowed with selfknowledge.
On her account Sugriva obtained the coveted kingdom ruled by Vali which was a difficult proposition, and retained supremacy in the world.
"On account of the largeeyed Sita I ventured to cross  the lord of rivers, the sea, and came to this city.
"Even if Rama turns this land stretching to the ocean upside down or even the entire world on account of her, it is justifiable, according to me.
"The sovereignty over the three worlds will weigh less than one sixteenth part of Janaka's daughter, Sita.
She had risen from the land when tilled by the plough and was covered with auspicious paddy dust resembling the pollen grains of lotuses, this daughter of Janaka, the great righteous ruler of Mithila, This lady with unswerving devotion to her husband.
"This celebrated lady is the eldest daughterinlaw of the noble, valiant king Dasaratha who never returned from the battleground without being victorious.
"She is the loving wife of the righteous, grateful, wise and selfrealised Rama. She has fallen into the hands of these shedemons.
"On account of her immense love towards her husband she has given up all kinds of luxuries, not caring for suffering. She was satisfied with fruits and roots in the desolate forest. Engaged in serving her husband, she experienced utmost joy as in her own palace. A lady of golden complexion who had not experienced suffering earlier is subjected to sorrow and is tolerating calamities in this way
"Rama deserves to see her.Just as a thirsty man longs for the source of water, Rama pines for this highly virtuous lady who is tormented by Ravana.
"Just as a king who had lost his kingdom feels happy on regaining it, surely Raghava will feel exhilarated when he gets her back.
Deprived of all sensual pleasures, and separated from her relatives, she is surviving with the hope of meeting them.
She is looking at neither the shedemons nor these trees full of flowers and fruits. She is surely thinking of Rama with a singleminded  attention.
"Indeed, the husband is the greatest ornament for a married woman. Hence though deserving adornment she does not like it, bereft of her husband who is her only ornament.
"Lord Rama indeed performs a difficult task in surviving without her. That he is not feeling despondent is a wonder.
Sita who is endowed with beautiful dark hair and eyes like a hundredpetalled lotus, who deserves to be happy is in sorrow. I grieve to see her in this state.
She who has beautiful eyes like lotus petals, was protected by the arms of both Rama and Lakshmna, who is tolerant like the earth and is guarded by the female demons of hideous appearance under a tree.
"Deprived of her charm, she resembles a lotuscreeper blasted by frost. This daughter of Janaka has reached a pitiable condition afflicted by series of calamities. She resembles a famale Chakravaka separated from her mate.
"The top branches of Ashoka trees bent down with blossoms and the Moon rising with thousands of cool rays at the end of winter (when spring sets in) beholding which she should be delighted intensfy her sorrow."
Hanuman, the swiftfooted bull among monkeys, on his part waiting on the Simsupa  tree thus reflecting concluded in his mind that she was Sita.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षोडशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the sixteenth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Then the Moon shining like a bed of lilies rose stainless, ascended the clear sky and looked like a swan swimming through blue water.
The Moon shed clear lightas if with his brightness and his cool rays he wished to refresh the son of the Windgod.
Then he saw Sita whose face shone like the fullmoon. But she was as though sinking under the burden of sorrow, like a boat with heavy load sinking in water.
While Hanuman was eager to observe Sita he saw many shedemons in ugly appearance close by her. One of them was oneeyed, another with a single ear, a third had ears covering the body, yet another had pointed (spikelike) ears, one was breathing through the nose on the head, one had long thin neck, one was hairless another had hair covering like a blanket. One of them had hanging ears on the forehead, another had big hanging lips, still another had long lips hanging  up to the chin. So also one had protruding knees, one stunted, one tall, another had lips extending up to her chin, yet another was longfaced and another had long knees. There was one pigmy, one tall, one was humpbacked and another a dwarf.Similarly an ugly looking one, another with gaping mouth, still another with a distorted face, one with yellow eyes and one of deformed face were seen.
Hanuman, the leader of the monkeys saw there shedemons of several distorted forms. Some were brown in colour and some black and some quarrelsome some holding spears, mallets and hammers of black iron, some with faces like boars, deer, tigers, goats and jackals feet like those of elephants, camels and horses, some had their head sunk into the trunk, others having one hand or one leg likewise some having ears like that of a donkey or a horse or a cow some with elephant ears and some with monkey ears some with big nose, without nose,with crooked nose and some without nostrils breathing through their forehead and some with the trunk of an elephant. Some with elephantfeet, with huge feet, and feet like that of cows and some with hair on their feet. There were some with huge heads and necks, some having large breasts, bellies, some with hanging breasts, and some with long nails and tongues. Similarly there were some having faces of goats, mouths of horses, camels or donkeys. They were terrifying, armed with iron crowbars and tridents. Some were wrathful, some with uneven gaping mouth, and some with smoky hair and distorted faces. They were always found drinking, smeared with flesh and blood and feeding on flesh and blood. Their appearance was horripilating. All of them were seated around the trunk of massive tree.
Hanuman, the leader of the monkeys saw there shedemons of several distorted forms. Some were brown in colour and some black and some quarrelsome some holding spears, mallets and hammers of black iron, some with faces like boars, deer, tigers, goats and jackals feet like those of elephants, camels and horses, some had their head sunk into the trunk, others having one hand or one leg likewise some having ears like that of a donkey or a horse or a cow some with elephant ears and some with monkey ears some with big nose, without nose,with crooked nose and some without nostrils breathing through their forehead and some with the trunk of an elephant. Some with elephantfeet, with huge feet, and feet like that of cows and some with hair on their feet. There were some with huge heads and necks, some having large breasts, bellies, some with hanging breasts, and some with long nails and tongues. Similarly there were some having faces of goats, mouths of horses, camels or donkeys. They were terrifying, armed with iron crowbars and tridents. Some were wrathful, some with uneven gaping mouth, and some with smoky hair and distorted faces. They were always found drinking, smeared with flesh and blood and feeding on flesh and blood. Their appearance was horripilating. All of them were seated around the trunk of massive tree.
Hanuman, the leader of the monkeys saw there shedemons of several distorted forms. Some were brown in colour and some black and some quarrelsome some holding spears, mallets and hammers of black iron, some with faces like boars, deer, tigers, goats and jackals feet like those of elephants, camels and horses, some had their head sunk into the trunk, others having one hand or one leg likewise some having ears like that of a donkey or a horse or a cow some with elephant ears and some with monkey ears some with big nose, without nose,with crooked nose and some without nostrils breathing through their forehead and some with the trunk of an elephant. Some with elephantfeet, with huge feet, and feet like that of cows and some with hair on their feet. There were some with huge heads and necks, some having large breasts, bellies, some with hanging breasts, and some with long nails and tongues. Similarly there were some having faces of goats, mouths of horses, camels or donkeys. They were terrifying, armed with iron crowbars and tridents. Some were wrathful, some with uneven gaping mouth, and some with smoky hair and distorted faces. They were always found drinking, smeared with flesh and blood and feeding on flesh and blood. Their appearance was horripilating. All of them were seated around the trunk of massive tree.
Hanuman, the leader of the monkeys saw there shedemons of several distorted forms. Some were brown in colour and some black and some quarrelsome some holding spears, mallets and hammers of black iron, some with faces like boars, deer, tigers, goats and jackals feet like those of elephants, camels and horses, some had their head sunk into the trunk, others having one hand or one leg likewise some having ears like that of a donkey or a horse or a cow some with elephant ears and some with monkey ears some with big nose, without nose,with crooked nose and some without nostrils breathing through their forehead and some with the trunk of an elephant. Some with elephantfeet, with huge feet, and feet like that of cows and some with hair on their feet. There were some with huge heads and necks, some having large breasts, bellies, some with hanging breasts, and some with long nails and tongues. Similarly there were some having faces of goats, mouths of horses, camels or donkeys. They were terrifying, armed with iron crowbars and tridents. Some were wrathful, some with uneven gaping mouth, and some with smoky hair and distorted faces. They were always found drinking, smeared with flesh and blood and feeding on flesh and blood. Their appearance was horripilating. All of them were seated around the trunk of massive tree.
Hanuman, the leader of the monkeys saw there shedemons of several distorted forms. Some were brown in colour and some black and some quarrelsome some holding spears, mallets and hammers of black iron, some with faces like boars, deer, tigers, goats and jackals feet like those of elephants, camels and horses, some had their head sunk into the trunk, others having one hand or one leg likewise some having ears like that of a donkey or a horse or a cow some with elephant ears and some with monkey ears some with big nose, without nose,with crooked nose and some without nostrils breathing through their forehead and some with the trunk of an elephant. Some with elephantfeet, with huge feet, and feet like that of cows and some with hair on their feet. There were some with huge heads and necks, some having large breasts, bellies, some with hanging breasts, and some with long nails and tongues. Similarly there were some having faces of goats, mouths of horses, camels or donkeys. They were terrifying, armed with iron crowbars and tridents. Some were wrathful, some with uneven gaping mouth, and some with smoky hair and distorted faces. They were always found drinking, smeared with flesh and blood and feeding on flesh and blood. Their appearance was horripilating. All of them were seated around the trunk of massive tree.
Hanuman, the leader of the monkeys saw there shedemons of several distorted forms. Some were brown in colour and some black and some quarrelsome some holding spears, mallets and hammers of black iron, some with faces like boars, deer, tigers, goats and jackals feet like those of elephants, camels and horses, some had their head sunk into the trunk, others having one hand or one leg likewise some having ears like that of a donkey or a horse or a cow some with elephant ears and some with monkey ears some with big nose, without nose,with crooked nose and some without nostrils breathing through their forehead and some with the trunk of an elephant. Some with elephantfeet, with huge feet, and feet like that of cows and some with hair on their feet. There were some with huge heads and necks, some having large breasts, bellies, some with hanging breasts, and some with long nails and tongues. Similarly there were some having faces of goats, mouths of horses, camels or donkeys. They were terrifying, armed with iron crowbars and tridents. Some were wrathful, some with uneven gaping mouth, and some with smoky hair and distorted faces. They were always found drinking, smeared with flesh and blood and feeding on flesh and blood. Their appearance was horripilating. All of them were seated around the trunk of massive tree.
The illustrious Hanuman watched the blameless princess Janaki who was seated under that tree.
Shorn of lustre, unkempt hair filled with dust, she appeared like a meteor slipped and fallen on land, merits exhausted.
She was rich by  her reputation for chastity but poor as she yearned to see her husband. Though devoid of all excellent ornaments, she looked adorned with love for her husband.
Besieged by the demon king, deprived of her near and dear ones, Sita was looking like a fettered female elephant separated from its herd and besieged by lions.
She appeared like a streak (crescent) of Moon covered by autumnal clouds at the close of the rainy season. She looked haggard since she was out of contact with her husband an unused lute with its strings let loose.
She deserves to be with Rama, but had fallen under the sway of shedemons. Sitting in the midst of Ashoka grove she was like a creeper without blossoms. Immersed in the ocean of sorrow the noble lady was like the star Rohini surrounded by unpropitious planets.
Even though she was daubed with dirt, and had no ornaments on her, she looked bright like a lotus fibre smeared with mud.
Hanuman saw the fawneyed lady clad in crushed and soiled clothes with a pathetic face. She felt no dejection when she thought of her husband's prowess. The blackeyed beauty was protected by her own chastity.
Seeing the fawneyed Sita, a frightened female deer  looking all around (as if for some help) sighing hot breath, was as though burning the trees having tender leaves with her hot sighs. She looked like a collective mass of all sorrows, a high tide of suffering.
She was a tolerant lady. She had beautiful limbs which looked splendid even though she was not wearing ornaments. Hanuman experienced immeasurable joy on seeing Mythili.
Seeing that lady with eyes intoxicating, Hanuman shed tears of joy. At once he paid obeisance to Rama. (thinking he could trace Sita at last).
Heroic Hanuman felt happy when he saw Sita. He offered salutations to Rama and Lakshmana at heart and covered himself (with the leaves of the Simsupa tree) and waited.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तदशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the seventeenth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The night came to a close while Hanuman went searching and looking for Sita at Ashoka grove full of flowering trees.
At dawn sounds of recitation of Vedas and the six auxillary sciences, (i.e .grammar, prosody, etymology, phonetics, astronomy and the science of rituals) by the brahmins among demons wellversed in performing exalted sacrificial ceremonies were heard.
By that time the strongarmed, powerful, tennecked Ravana was awakened by the delightful sounds of auspicious musical instruments.
The chivalrous lord of demons woke up as usual.His raiment and garland were still in disarray and he thought of Vaidehi.
The demon king who was unable to hide his great passion and control his senses was drawn towards Sita, in his state of intoxication.
Adorned with all ornaments and glowing with excellent splendour he went through the path filled with trees flourishing with all kinds of flowers and fruits.
Ponds covered with a variety of beautiful flowers and colourful birds always cheerful looked very wonderful.
Watching the garden filled with trees, gateways ornamented with gold and gems, he entered through the pleasant pathways in the Ashoka garden. There were wonderful wolves and several herds of animals in the garden. Fruits dropped from trees were strewn all over.
Ravana, son of sage Paulasti, was followed by a hundred women, just as Indra is trailed by the females of gods and gandharvas.
Some women carried golden lamps, some held yalk tail fans in their hands while others bore palmleaf fans.
Some moved ahead of him carrying water in golden pitchers. Others followed him carrying circular couches (to be used as seats).
One glorious and compassionate lady carried in her right hand a gemstudded jar filled with wine.
Another shedemon moved behind him holding an umbrella with a golden handle which was white like a royal swan and bright like the fullmoon.
The chief wives of Ravana with eyes dizzy with sleep and drinking followed their heroic husband like streaks of lightning follow a thunder cloud. (Ravana who was dark looked like a cloud and the women with dazzling golden complexion appeared like lightning.)
The necklaces and armlets (of the wives) disarrayed, the sandal paste and other unguents on the body smudged, hair hanging down their faces, the sweating damsels followed Ravana. They were dizzy with leftover intoxication and sleep and were swaying from side to side. Their dishevelled hair was loose and faces filled with sweat, their flower garlands on the body had wilted due to sweat on their limbs. The drunken wives of Ravana, actuated by their high regard and passion for him followed as he advanced with drunken eyes.
Their husband, powerful Ravana under the control of passion looking dull, absorbed in the  thoughts of Sita walked slowly as though counting his steps.
Then Hanuman, son of the Windgod, heard their jingling golden girdles and anklets.
Then Hanuman, the Vanara saw Ravana of extraordinary deeds, and of unimaginable strength and valour at the entrance (of Ashoka garden)
Hanuman saw him in the glow of lamps wet with fragrant oil carried by many shedemons all over.
Hanuman saw him, who was possessed of lust, arrogance and intoxication. He appeared like Cupid setting aside his quiver and arrows with his curved, big, red eyes.
He was playfully pulling up his upper garment that slipped and stuck to his armlet. This excellent unsoiled robe was looking like the foam of churned nectar.
Hanuman seated on a leafy branch (of the simsupa tree) thickly covered with leaves and flowers started scanning the identity of Ravana who was drawing nearer.
The leader of the monkeys started gazing at the chief wives of Ravana endowed with youth and beauty৷৷
Surrounded by beauties, the glorious king entered the grove meant for women, reverberating with the sounds of beasts and birds.
The brilliant vanara looked at the son of Visravas (Ravana), the demon king  adorned with wonderful ornaments. He had long tapering ears. He was intoxicated with drink. Encircled by damsels, he was looking like the Moon surrounded by stars.
The brilliant vanara (Hanuman), son of the Windgod recognising the strongarmed Ravana got down a little, saying 'This is truly the strongarmed Ravana.'
Hanuman, possessed of extraordinary energy, was taken aback at the might of Ravana. He remained hiding covered over with leaves.
With the desire to see Sita endowed with black hair, beautiful hips, plump breasts and dark sideglances, Ravana returned (to Ashokavana).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टादशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the eighteenth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
On just seeing Ravana, the lord of demons from a distance, adorned with the best of ornaments the charming, young, blameles princess Vaidehi of beautiful waist trembled like a banana plant shaken by a strong wind.
Largeeyed, faircomplexioned Sita seated there with her belly, thighs and breasts covered with arms cried.
The tennecked Ravana, too, on his part saw Sita, tormented with grief, guarded by the shedemons like a boat sunk in the sea.
She looked woeful seated on the bare earth like the broken branch of a tree cut and fallen down on the ground.
Her body looked colourful with dust. Although she deserved adornment, she had none. She was like a lotus stem in mud looking bright yet dull (with mud).
She was as though moving towards the knower of the self, the supreme king, Rama with the horses of her resolution yoked to the chariot of her mind.
She was emaciated, absorbed in thought of Rama alone and crying and unable to find the end to her grief.
Sitting in that manner she resembled a coiled serpent queen, the star Rohini overshadowed by a smoking comet (that is Ravana).
Though born in a traditional righteous and virtuous family, she was as though passing through a purificatory process like a lowbred woman.
She resembled reputation besmirched by scandals, like Vedic studies  slackened by lack of aplication. (Knowledge is verified with a suitable statment of the Veda which is the ultimate test of ones finding. This method is adopted in all Astika sastras which accept the authority of the Veda).
She was like great fame grown dim, faith slighted, worship meddled and hope frustrated.(Note: Sita's condition is being compared with abstract concepts such as fame, faith, reverence and hope which are hit by reverses in fate. She was the personification of all such suffering.)
She was like a prospect blasted, command flouted, entire direction set on flames at the time of catastrophe and articles of worship abducted by evil forces at the sacrificial ceremony.
She was like a lotuscreeper blighted, an army with its gallant warriors killed, radiance of light blocked by darkness and a stream run dry.
(She was) like the altar of worship defiled, blazing fire extinguished, and the Moon eclipsed by Rahu in the full moon night.
(She appeared) like a lotuspond the excellent leaves of whose lotuses surrounded by frightened birds are destroyed by the trunks of elephants.
Stricken with grief caused by separation from her husband, she appeared like a river gone thin and dry, not fit for ablution, like a night during dark fortnight of the month deprived of all its glow.
A delicate lady with beautiful limbs who deserved to be in a gemcrusted house was (now) like a lotus stem just plucked out and  scorched by the Sun's heat.
She was sighing heavily in intense grief like a royal female elephant tied to a pillar and separated from her lord, the leader of the herd.
She was lovely even with a single braid of unkempt hair like the earth with a single row of dark trees covering its surface at the end of the rainy season.
She was wasted and emaciated through fasting and grief, depressed due to brooding and threatenings. She ate very little but was rich with  austerities.
Tormented with grief, Sita looked like a goddess begging Rama, the foremost of the Raghu family with folded hands in her mind to destroy Ravana, the tennecked demon.
Blameless Mythili with clear, large eyes and beautiful eyelashes with a reddish tint at the corners was looking around, crying. Ravana tried to allure Sita who was deeply faithful to Rama and threatened to kill her (when he found her unflinching).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकोनविंशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the nineteenth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Ravana expressed his intention in sweet words to the depressed and griefstricken ascetic Sita surrounded by demon guards:
"On seeing me, Sita, you want to conceal your thighs, belly and breasts through fear of me. I think you do not want me to see you.
"O largeeyed one  you are endowed with beauty in all limbs. You are the delight of all worlds. I desire you, dear  Oblige me.
"O Sita no human or demon. who can take any form at their will can relieve your fear born of me.
"O timid lady having an unrighteous approach to wives of others or their abduction by force is natural to demons, There is no doubt.
"Mythili  let passion hold its sway over my body as it will. But I shall not force you or touch you since you do not love me.
"O reverend lady, fear not me on that account. Have confidence in me. Show your love. Do not be swayed by grief .
"O Lady, to wear a single braid, sleep on the ground, brooding, wearing soiled clothes and fasting without proper occasion does not suit you.
"O Mythili having secured me, you get all these comforts wonderful garlands, sandal, incense, garments and beautiful ornaments, rich drinks, beds and seats.You can enjoy songs, dances accompanied by musical instruments.
"You are a, a jewel among women. You should not  remain like this. You  should adorn yourself properly. How can you remain deprived after having me?
"Your charming youth should not pass away (uselessly). A past event does not come back like a current of stream.
"O lady  with auspicious looks Me thinks, the creator must have retired after creating your beautiful form. For there is no one comparable to you in beauty.
"O Vaidehi you have (extraordinary) beauty  and (exuberant) youth. Who would not lose his balance of mind even if he were Brahma the grandsire himself after getting you?
"O one with a face like the cool fullmoon, with heavy hips. I am unable to extricate my eyes from any limb (of your body) I see.
"O Mythili  be my wife. Give up this (folly due to) delusion. Be my chief consort among the several excellent women I have picked up here and there. Be blessed.
"O timid lady, gems brought forcibly from all the worlds, this kingdom as well as myself are yours.
"O lovely lady I will win all the cities and lands and give them to Janaka for your sake.
"I'm unrivalled in this entire world. Behold my matchless virility which permits no rival in war.
"The gods and demons were unable to withstand my power in wars fought against me. They were often shattered and defeated with their flags crushed in war.
"Offer your love to me. Get yourself decorated in an excellent way. Wear glowing ornaments on your limbs. Let me see you in pleasingly decorated form.
"O charming lady decorate yourself liberally. Enjoy these pleasures as you please. Drink and make merry.
"Give away land and wealth as you wish. Enjoy with me freely and command me boldly. I will obey you by all means.
"O blessed lady, see my affluence and my fame. Seeing you enjoy (life) by my grace all your kinsmen will follow.
"O beautiful lady Rama has renounced victory, he has lost his fortune. Clad in bark, he is wandering in the forest following asceticism and sleeping on the ground. What can he do  for you? I am in doubt if he is alive or not.
"O Vaidehi I wonder if Rama can see you at all. You are like moonlight veiled by dark clouds and  cannot  be seen even by the flying cranes.
"Surely Raghava will not be able to win you back from my hands any more than the demon Hiranyakasipu was able to usurp the fame of Indra.
"O lovely, timid lady your smile, your teeth and your eyes are bewitching. Just as Garuda snatches away a serpent, you ravish my mind by your beauty.
"Even when you are attired in soiled silk and are bereft of ornaments, I find no interest in my own wives.
"O Janaki There are a number of virtuous consorts residing in the harem of my royal palace. You may exercise your authority on all of them.
"O Sita of heavy hips and beautiful brows Be happy. Enjoy all the worlds of mine, the gems and wealth of Ravana.
"O queen Rama is not equal to me  either in penance or prowess or valour or wealth or brilliance or even in fame.
"O delightful one I will bestow you with heaps of riches and land. Therefore, enjoy with me drinking, sporting, and revelling. Accept me and be happy to sport with me.Let your elatives join you and enjoy all my wealth.
"O timid lady embellish yourself with necklaces of pure gold and enjoy with me in the enchanting seaside forest groves full of trees with blossoms and swarming bees.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे विंशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the twentieth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
On hearing the demon's haughty words, oppressed, pitiable Sita replied slowly in a sorrowful tone.
Sita, austere, beautiful and chaste afflicted by grief kept sobbing. Brooding over her husband and trembling in fear, she placed a blade of grass in between her and Ravana and replied with a gentle smile on her face.
"Turn your mind away from me and fix it on your wives. You should not expect to seek me just as a sinner cannot hope to seek blessedness.
"I was born of high lineage and joined a meritorious family by virtue of my marriage. I am devoted only to my husband. I should not commit this contemptible, forbidden act."
Glorious Vaidehi having thus spoken to the demon turned her back and continued:
"I cannot be your lawful wife obtainable by your personal efforts. I am a chaste woman married to another man. (Being a king) examine the dharma honestly and adopt a pious way of life.
"O nightranger Enjoy your wives. Take care of them. Taking your example, others' wives also deserve to be protected.
"The wives of others will insult an evilminded man who is not satisfied with his own wives, is fickleminded and has no control over his senses.
"You are indulging in unrighteous act and not listening to the advice of wise men who have a sense of discrimination. You are the cause of the destruction of demons.
"Even prosperous countries and cities are destroyed on account of indiscreet rulers engaged in unfair means.
"Having got you as its ruler, this Lanka filled with gems (riches) will perish without delay for the crime of one individual.
"O Ravana living beings will welcome and enjoy the destruction of a shortsighted sinner killed by his own vile act.
"Seeing you, getting ruined this way for your sin, those who were angry with you for their humiliation in your hands will feel glad and say 'Luckily this terrible fellow has met with his doom' .
"I cannot be lured by your power or wealth. I am inseparable from Raghava like light from the Sun.
"How can I pillow on somebody's arm after resting on the honourable arm of the great lord of the worlds ?
"I am alone the lawful wife of the lord of the earth like the knowledge of the Vedas which rightfully belongs to a wise brahmin who has realised the self after having had his ceremonial bath (as a token of celibacy) and having observed strict vows during the period of his study.
"O Ravana it is proper for you to unite me in distress with Rama as one would unite a female elephant with the lordly elephant from which it is separated in the wilderness.
"I wish you to build friendship with Rama, the bull among men. Surely it is the right thing for you to do, if you are desirous of avoiding a dreadful death.
"He is famous as a knower of dharma and is compassionate to those who seek his protection. If you desire to preserve your life build friendship with him.
"Propitiate him. He is compassionate to those who seek refuge. Exercise control over your senses for your sake and it is proper for you to return me to him.
"It is good for you to give me back to Rama, the foremost in the Raghu dynasty. Otherwise you will face death.
"You will hear the terrible twang of Rama's bow resembling the rumble of the thunderbolt released by Indra who performed a hundred yajnas.
"The shafts bound with feathers of Kanka birds (released by Rama and Lakshmana) will be killing the demons all over this Lanka. They will not give a chance for any other weapon to fall.
"Just as Garuda swiftly extirpates the serpents, Rama will exterminate the demon leaders.
"My husband, the subduer of enemies, will soon take me away just as Lord Visnu in the form of Vamana took away the glowing prosperity from the demons with three strides.
"When the army of demons as killed you had no capacity to protect and was destroyed at Janasthana, the place of death. You acted in this dishonest way.
"You are a mean creature. Finding me in the vacant hut, when the two brothers, lions among men, were away, you  abducted me.
"Had you smelt the presence of Rama and Lakshmna, it would not have been possible for you to stand there, like a dog under the gaze of a pair of tigers.
"You will not be able to withstand them in a battle. You will meet the same fate as the onearmed Vritra in a battle with the twoarmed Indra.
"My lord Rama accompanied by Saumitri will draw out your life by his arrows swiftly as Aditya sucks up shallow water at once by his radiance.
"Even if you fly to Kubera's mountain (Kailasa) or the residence of king Varuna (ocean) you will not escape Rama's arrows like a mighty tree cannot evade lightning.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकविंशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the twentyfirst sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hearing the sharp words of pleasing Sita, the lord of demons replied in unpleasant terms:
"The more the lover is courteous and loving and pleasing to women the more he is humiliated by them.
"My love for you has restrained my anger, just as a good charioteer controls the horses galloping on a wrong path.
"Love is partial. It gets bound to those in whomsoever compassion and friendship is generated, even though they are punishable.
"O beautiful one it is on this account that I do not kill you even though you deserve to be killed and insulted (for the words used),  even as you are engaged in a pseudoascetic life.
"O Mythili for each of the piercing statements made you deserve dreadful death."
Ravana, the lord of demons, said these words in reply to Vaidehi who was overcome with  anger and exitement.
"I shall wait for two months, the deadline fixed. O lady of beautiful hue thereafter you have to share my bed.
"If you are still reluctant to accept me as your husband after two months you will be sent to kitchen to be cooked as morning breakfast for me".
Observing Janaki, threatened by the demon king the daughters of gods and gandharvas shed tears with distressful eyes.
When Sita was threatened by the demon king, the daughters of gods and gandharvas there consoled her through gestures of their lips and eyes.
Having thus been consoled, Sita, proud of the power of her virtues, said this to Ravana in selfdefence:
"Obviously there is no one among your people keen on your welfare since nobody is preventing you from this reproachable act.
"Who in all the three worlds other than you would, even in mind, seek this consort of the righteous self (Sri Rama) like  Sachi to Indra? .
"O stupid demon where can you go to escape the consequences of your sinful words spoken against Rama's consort of undimmed brilliance?
"It is like a proud elephant fighting in war with a rabbit. Rama is like an elephant and you are like an ordinary rabbit people speak of.
"You are not ashamed of belittling Rama in his absence. You have not yet walked into his sight.
"O ignoble wretch I wonder why your dark brown, distorted eyes do not fall off (the socket) when you look at me (lustfully).
"Why does not your tongue drop down while you speak such words against this consort of the righteous king (Rama) and daughterin law of Dasaratha?
"O Ravana I can reduce you to ashes through the fire of my chastity. But I do not have Rama's permission and I want to preserve my power of ascetism even though you are fit to be consigned to the flames.
"When I was with wise Rama, it was not possible for you to abduct me. No doubt Providence has ordained this to bring about your death.
"You are a (great) warrior and a brother of Kubera. You possess an army. Then why did you abduct Rama's wife bypassing him?"
On hearing Janaki, the lord of demons, Ravana looked at her with his cruel eyes opened wide and rolling.
Prosperous Ravana looked like a mass of dark cloud, with strong arms, stout neck, gait of a lion, a blazing tongue and burning eyes
He appeared taller with an unsteady crown. He was wearing wonderful red flower garlands and clothes and was smeared with unguents, shining in ornamental armlets.
Wrapped well with a big black thread around his hips, he appeared like mount Mandara encompassed by a black serpent at the time of churning the milkocean for nectar.
The lord of demons shone like mount Mandara, both his long two arms like two mountain peaks.
He stood like a mountain with two Ashoka trees clothed with red leaves and flowers in the form of earrings of the colour of the rising Sun.
He was comparable to the wishfulfilling tree grown in heaven, a personified spring season and a memorial structure raised on the cremation ground. He looked frightening even though  welladorned.
Looking at Vaidehi, eyes red with anger, and breathing heavily like a histing snake, Ravana replied:
"O Sita you are following a vow of chastity and treading a meaningless, wrong path. I will destroy you as the Sun dispels the morning twilight with his lustre".
King Ravana, a tormentor of enemies, having thus threatened Mythili commanded the shedemons women of fiecrceful appearance as follows:
Of them one had one eye, the other one ear, another with ears covered, one had the ear of a cow, another had ears of an elephant and yet another, long, hanging ears. One had the feet of an elephant, another, hoofs of a horse and still another of a cow. While one had a single foot, another had broad feet and yet another no feet at all. One had a long neck and a large head. One had large breasts and belly. One had a big face and eyes, another had a long tongue and yet another no tongue at all. One had no nose and still another had a lion face and yet another the face of a cow.
"O demonesses, all of you jointly dispose Janaki towards me. See that she submits to me at once.
"By adopting means favourable or contrary to her will or through persuasion or coercion or through reward or punishment, draw Vaidehi's mind towards me." (said Ravana).
The demon king repeatedly commanded the ogresses burning in anger and passion and threatened Sita again and again, pointing his finger at her.
An ogress called Dhanyamalini at once approached the tenheaded Ravana and embracing him, said:.
"O king of demons, sport with me, my lord. What purpose will be served with this pale wretched Sita, a human being after all?
"O king surely she is not ordained by Brahma, the foremost among the immortals to enjoy the luxuries earned by the strength of your arms.
Having heard her words, the demon king who resembled a fierce dark cloud turned away, laughing heartily.
Thereupon the tennecked demon departed, as if he was shaking the earth and entered his residence which was shining like the blazing midday Sun.
Then the daughters of gods, gandharvas and nagas gathered round and followed him into his excellent palace.
Having derided Mythili trembling in fear yet steadfast in treading the righteous path, Ravana, overpowered with passion left her and entered his glittering mansion.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्वाविंशस्सर्गः।Thus ends twentysecond sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
King Ravana, tormentor of enemies, having thus spoken to Mythili commanded the demonesses and departed.
As the demon king left for his abode all the demonesses of hideous looks rushed towards Sita and crowded around her.
The demonesses, overcome with anger, approached Sita and harshly said:
'O Sita don't you think it is a privilege to be the  wife of the highsouled, tennecked Ravana, who is the distinguished king of a high family of sage Paulastya?
Then Ekajata, a shedemon of hideous looks, eyes red with anger and a belly of the size of the palm said to Sita:
'The mindborn son of Brahma is well known as Paulastya. He was the fourth  among the six Prajapatis (Maricha, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Plaha, Kratu).
'This glorious mindborn sage Pulastya's son is the famous Vishrava who, in glory and splendour was equal to Prajapatis.
'O largeeyes lady to become the wife of the lord of demons is a stroke of good luck. You deserve to be one. O lady of beautiful limbs why don't you accept his proposal?'
Then an ogress called Harijata said this in anger, her cateyes rolling:
'You ought to be the wife of the lord of ogres who has vanquished thirty three crores of gods including Indra, their king.'
Then an ogress named Praghasa, overwhelmed with anger, deriding Sita said these terrible words:
'Why don't you wish to be the wife of such a mighty and powerful king, a valiant hero who has never beaten a retreat in war?
'Even renouncing his highly respectable,  favourite wife among all, mighty Ravana is prepared to accept you.
'Ravana is prepared to abandon a thousand wives in his prosperous harem  decorated with all kinds of gems in order to accept you.'
Another ogress called Vikata said, ' Know that he who has often defeated gods in war and has vanquished nagas, gandharvas and demons has come to you (seeking your favour)'.
'O foolish woman why don't you seek the wifehood of a glorious king of demons who has abundance of wealth?'
Then an ogress called Durmukhi said, 'O lady of long sideglances why don't you yield to him, afraid of whom the Sun scorches not and strong winds blow not?
'O lady of beautiful brows why don't you make up your mind to accept the king of kings, afraid of whom the trees rain flowers, the mountains and clouds release water at his will? Ravana is the king of the southwest, direction Why don't you wish to be his wife?
Then the hideous ogresses approached Sita and spoke these harsh words in an unbecoming manner:
'O Sita why don't you agree to dwell in Ravana's inner apartment furnished with fine bedsteads, and which is delightful?
'You are  a woman, wife of Rama, an ordinary mortal you are holding in high esteem. Withdraw your mind from Rama or else you will not survive.
'O charming lady you have an irreproachable beauty and grace. Why do you think of human Rama only who has been dethroned from the kingdom. He is only a human being who is unsuccessful and distressful.'
Hearing the words of the ogresses, Sita with eyes like lotus petals full of tears replied this way:
'Dejected or dethroned from the kingdom, Rama is my lawful husband. I will ever remain devoted to Rama as Suvarchala, wife of the Sungod is to him.
'I am steadfast (in love) to my husband Rama, the foremost of the Ikshvaku family in the same manner as noble Sachi to Indra, Arundhati to Vasistha, Rohini to the Moon, Lopamudra to Agastya, Sukanya to sage Chyavana, Savitri to Satyavan, Srimati to Kapilamuni Madayanti to Soudasu, Kesini to king Sagara and Bhima's daughter Damayanti to her lord Nala, (the king of Nishadas)'.
Hearing the reply of Sita, the ogresses ordered by Ravana and overtaken by anger again began to threaten Sita using harsh words.
Hanuman who kept himself concealed on the simsupa tree speechlessly listened to the ogresses threatening Sita.
Sita was trembling in fear. The  enraged ogresses went on licking their lips hanging, again and again.
The enraged ogresses immediately picked up the axes and rose up saying, 'she is unfit to have the demon king, Ravana as her husband'.
As the charming Sita was threatened by the fierce ogresses, she moved towards the simsupa tree with eyes full of tears.
Then the largeeyed Sita, drowned in sorrow surrounded by the ogresses went near the simsupa tree and stood there.
The ogresses started intimidating Sita who was dressed in soiled clothes and emaciated with a dejected look on her face.
Then a dark ogress called Vinata with a terryfying look, loathsome appearance and a large sunken belly said to Sita:
'O Sita you have shown your love for your husband to this extent. It is enough. O auspicious lady anything carried to excess leads to adversity.
"O Mythili I beseech you (to oblige Ravana). You have discharged your duty as a human being. Be happy. But you should also heed my advice which is, after all, salutary.
'Leave the helpless human Rama and seek Ravana's refuge. O Vaidehi, using the heavenly unguents and adorned with imposing ornaments from now on, be the queen of all people.
'O beautiful Sita Just like Swaha, queen to the Firegod and Sachi to Indra, accept Ravana. Why are you still thinking of Rama who is helpless and whose life span is coming to an end soon.
'If you do not heed our words of advice, all of us will eat you at this very moment.'
Now Vikata another ogress with hanging breasts raised her fist up in anger and roared at Sita.
'O wicked Mythili we have tolerated many unpleasant words uttered by you due to our kindness and mildness৷৷
'O Mythili you have heeded not our good and timely advice tendered in your interest. You have been brought to the other shore of the ocean and to the inner chambers of Ravana which is very difficult for others to access.
'You are in Ravana's house, wellguarded by us. It is not possible even for Indra, destroyer of citadels, to come to your rescue (let alone Rama).
'Mythili, act according to our advice. I am your wellwisher. Give up sorrow and stop shedding useless tears.
'O Sita offer your love to Ravana, adore him and be happy. Give up this continuous dejection. Enjoy all pleasures along with the king of demons.
'O timid Sita know that youth of women is fleeting and transient. Before it is over, enjoy all kinds of pleasures.
'O lady of intoxicating eyes range in the company of the demon king, the delightful gardens and mountain ranges filled with gardens.
'O beautiful Sita seven thousand ogresses will be at your beck and call. (Therefore) accept Ravana, the lord of all ogres as your husband.
'O Mythili if you heed not my words of advice, I will pluck out your heart and eat it up'.
Next spoke a fiercelooking ogress called Chandodari, overcome with anger taking up a huge trident and rotating.
'I have developed a morbid desire to feast upon this woman with eyes flashing like doe's, whose breasts heave with stress and fear after she was abducted by Ravana.
'I thought of feasting on your spleen, liver, heart, all the joints, head and intestines.'
Next spoke an ogress called Praghasa, saying 'Why not we twist and squeeze the neck of this heartless lady. Why are you sitting idle still? Come on.'
'Thereafter we will announce that such a human being is dead. Then Ravana will simply say 'eat her up'. There is no doubt .'
Then an ogress called Ajamukhi said, 'Let her body be cut into lumps of equal pieces.
'We shall share them. I do not like disputes in this regard. Go swiftly and get drinks and food to lick. Let the accompanying  dishes of all variety and quality be brought.'
Then an ogress called Surpanakha said, 'I too like the proposal of Ajamukhi.'
'Get the wine quickly, destroyer of all sorrows. After relishing the human flesh we will start Nikumbhila dance.'
Threatened by the ogresses in that manner, Sita who was like the daughter of a god, cried aloud.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुर्विंशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the twentyfourth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
On hearing the many harsh words of dire threat by the ugly ogresses, the daughter of Janaka wept.
In reply to the ogresses who thus spoke, noble Vaidehi, terribly frightened, said in a voice choked with tears.
Surrounded by the ogresses, distressed Sita, who was like the daughter of a divine, did not get any solace.
'Like a doe that strayed from the herd in the forest and tormented by  wolves around, Sita had withdrawn into herself all her limbs through fear, she was trembling excessively.
Laying hold on a large blossoming branch of the Ashoka tree, Sita thought of her husband with a broken heart.
Her large breasts bathed with the flow of tears, she continued to brood over her plight  and found no end to it.
Trembling like a banana tree uprooted by the stormy wind, Sita who was seized with fear of the ogresses looked pale and desperate.
The long, luxuriant braid of hair of the trembling Sita waving (in the wind), appeared like a crawling female serpent.
The distressed Mythili, her consciousness drowned in grief, sighing, shed streams of tears.
'The bright, beautiful Sita began to wail, alas, "Rama alas, Lakshmana alas, my motherinlaw, Kausalya alas, Sumitra
'There is a famous popular saying among the learned that untimely death is not possible  either for a woman or a man.It is true that I am living in this miserable condition, deprived of Rama's company and tormented by these cruel ogresses here. Living in such conditions even for a moment is impossible. But nobody dies an untimely death.
'I am a woman of low merit, a wretched woman, an orphan. I will be ruined like the loaded boat that gets hit in the midst of the ocean by the stormy wind.
'Unable to find my husband and seized by these ogresses, I am collapsing on account of grief like a riverbank under the current of water.
'Blessed are those who are in touch with my husband with eyes like lotus petals, whose walk is majestic like a lion's, who has a sense of gratitude and is pleasing in words.
'Separated from Rama endowed with selfknowledge, it is impossible for me to live like one who has drunk venom.
'I do not know what great sin I have committed in my past life for which I experience this terrific, cruel affliction?
'I long to give up my life, afflicted with great grief, as I, wellguarded by these ogresses, have no hope  to reach Rama.
'Fie upon this human life. Fie upon this dependence. What a pitiable situation I am placed in. It is not possible for me, a human, to give up life at my free will.'           इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चविंशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the twentyfifth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The young daughter of king Janaka thus speaking, began to cry, her face bent down.
Bewildered or distracted or intoxicated, this young lady wailed, wallowing round on the ground like a young female horse:
"When Rama was engaged (in deer hunt) and I was screaming, I was brought forcibly by Ravana who can assume any form at his will.
"Having fallen under the clutches of the dreadful demonesses and threatened by them, I am so full of woes and worries that I don't want to live.
"In the absence of the great charioteer Rama, of what use is my living in the midst of ogresses? I need no wealth, no ornaments.
"It may be, that my heart is made of stone or it has no age or death since it does not riven even with grief.
"I am preserving this sinful life like this though separated from Rama. Fie on me, for this wretched, infidel life
"How can I have interest in any kind of pleasure without my sweettongued husband, the lord of the whole earth extending up to the ocean.
"I will give up my body. Break me  into pieces or eat me up. I cannot bear the sorrow of separation from my dear Rama any longer.
"I will not even touch that vile nightranger Ravana with my left foot. What to speak of loving him.
"Even if I am cut, broken to pieces or burnt in glowing fire, I will not accept Ravana. Why do you shout for so long?
"Rama is renowned, wise, grateful and kindly. It is due to my misfortune that he has turned pitiless to me. There is no doubt.
"He who destroyed fourteen thousand demons singlehanded has not come to protect me. I do not know why.
"Rama, my husband, for sure, is capable of killing in battle this Ravana who has held me captive and who is a demon of inferior valour.
"Why is Rama who killed Viradha, a bull among demons, in Dandaka forest in the fight not coming to rescue me?
"This Lanka in the middle of the ocean is unassailable. But there is nothing which can resist the arrows of Rama.
"What may be the reason that my loving husband, Rama who is highly powerful has not reached this place to which I was abducted by the demon.
"The elder brother of Lakshamana does not know that I am here. Or, I'm afraid, the glorious Rama knows and yet tolerates such an outrageous act.
"Even the king of vultures knows I was borne away. He could have informed Rama. But he has also been thrashed down on the earth by Ravana in the fight.
"Though old, Jatayu did a great help to me by resisting Ravana in the duel and advancing (to confront him.).
"Had only Raghava known that I was here he would have freed this world of demons with his anger.
"Had Rama known that I am in Lanka he would have blown up this city, dried up the ocean and destroyed the name and fame of the mean Ravana.
"Like me weeping, the cry of ogresses with lost husbands will be heard in every house in Lanka. There is no doubt.
"If only Lakshmana and Rama in their quest for Lanka reach here, it is  not possible within their sight for the enemy to survive  even a moment.
"Very soon this Lanka will be enveloped with smoke from funeral pyres and thronged with flocks of vultures moving in circles. It will be like a burial ground.
"Your bad behaviour forebodes illluck for you.I shall have my desire fulfilled in a short time.
"Inauspicious signs are seen here in Lanka. In a short time this city will lose its splendour.
"Surely this impregnable Lanka will wither up (lose its splendour) and appear like a widow when this sinful Ravana, a mean demon is killed.
"This city of Lanka with many auspicious celebrations will lose its king and all mean ogresses will remain like widows.
"I shall surely hear very soon sounds of distressful cry of young ogresses in every household.
"Totally burnt by Rama's arrows, this Lanka will be filled with darkness, and its splendour lost and preeminent demons destroyed.
"If the heroic Rama of bloodshot eyes comes to know that I am here at Ravana's, the expiry of time limit fixed by this cruel, lowly, foolish Ravana has arrived, this wicked fellow's death is inevitable.
"Nothing is forbidden for sinful demons. A calamity will befall now due to this adharma. The flesheating ogres are aware of neither dharma nor adharma
"This demon is determined to make me his morning meal. How can I do anything in the absence of my lord of pleasing countenance. I am distressed very much by not seeing Rama, possessed of eyes with a reddish tinge in the corners.
"Neither Lakshmana nor his elder brother knows that I am here alive. (Had they known) both of them would have ransacked this earth.
"Would it be that the heroic elder brother of Lakshmana has gone to the abode of gods unable to find me on this earth?
"Blessed are the gods, gandharvas, and siddhas and great sages who are able to see my lotuseyed lord Rama.
"Or that royal sage, wise Rama who always seeks dharma having become one with the supreme spirit has no longer any interest in me?
"Love attaches itself to one who remains before one's eyes.Friendship fades with separation. The ungrateful destroy love and friendship (as their love is conditioned by frequent meetings). But it cannot happen in case of Rama.
"Do I, a charming lady, not have any good fortune because of my past deeds? I wonder how a foremost woman like me seperated from my husband is sinking in grief without Rama. Has my fortune diminished?
"Instead of living separated from noble and brave Rama, a blemishless character and a destroyer of enemies, it is better for me to die.
"May be both the brothers, foremost among men, have laid down their arms, and taken to asceticism, subsisting on roots and fruits.
"Or else, has this wicked demon king slain both the brothers Rama and Lakshmana by some deceptive means?
"By all means I wish to die in these circumstances. However, death is not ordained for me even in this sorrowful state.
"Blessed are the exhalted sages who have not committed any sin. They have selfcontrol and have subdued their senses. There is no pleasure or displeasure for them.
"Salutations to those exalted souls who have distanced themselves from pleasure and displeasure. Pleasures may not lead to suffering or displeasure to excessive, meaningless fear for such great souls.
"Separated from the wise Rama who deserves pleasant things I will give up life being under the clutches of the sinful Ravana.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षडिवंश स्सर्गः।Thus ends the twentysixth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hearing Sita's words, some terrifying demonesses, overwhelmed with anger, went to inform Ravana, who was quick to act.
The dreadfullooking demonesses once again approached Sita and conveyed her categorically in harsh words the terrible consequences (ahead)
"O vile one you are determined in your evil ways. Today these shedemons will eat away your flesh to their heart's content ".
Then seeing the ignoble shedemons threatening Sita, an old demoness called Trijata, who was lying down there, said:
"Devour yourselves now, O ignoble ones, if you will. Do not eat Janaka's favourite daughter, the daughterinlaw of Dasaratha.
"Tonight I had a terrific, horriplating nightmare in which I saw the annihilation of all demons and the triumph of Sita's husband".
"O Trijata, tell us the kind of dream you dreamt last night", they insisted. Hearing the words from the mouth of the shedemons, Trijata told them all about her dream.
"Rama, in white attire, wearing a garland of white flowers, ascending a palanquin made of ivory drawn by a thousand swans and coursing through the sky with Lakshmana arrived.
"I also saw Sita in my dream wearing white robes and perched on a white mountain surrounded by the ocean.
"Just as light is united with the Sun, I saw Sita united with Rama. I saw Rama with Lakshmana riding a huge, mountainlike elephant having four tusks.
"Dressed in white garlands and clothes, the two brothers, tigers among men, glowing in their effulgence approached Janaki.
"Then from the front of the mountain Janaki shifted to the back of the elephant held by her husband waiting in the sky.
"Then I saw the lotuseyed Sita springing up from the lap of her husband and playfully caressing the Moon and Sun with her palms.
"Then the excellent elephant was seen halted in the city of Lanka with both princes and the largeeyed Sita mounted on the elephant.
"Rama accompanied by his wife Sita came on a chariot yoked to eight white oxen.
"Valiant Rama, foremost among men, accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and wife Sita went towards the northerly direction in the wonderful Pushpaka chariot that resembled the Sun.
"In this way I saw in my dream Rama as valiant as Lord Visnu accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and his wife Sita.
"Just as a sinner cannot attain heaven Rama cannot be won by gods or demons, even rakshasas and others.
"I saw the body of Ravana lying on the ground smeared with oil, clad in red, wearing a garland of lilies and intoxicated with drinking.
"Tonight I saw (in another dream) Ravana with shaven head, clad in black clothes, fallen down on the ground from the Pushpaka chariot, being dragged by a woman.
"He was wearing red garlands and unguents, his body smeared with oil. He was drinking, laughing and dancing, his mind and senses perplexed. He was driving on a chariot yoked to donkeys.
"I saw the demon king Ravana running behind the chariot driven by donkeys in the southerly direction. He was falling with his head bent down and deluded by the fear of the donkey.
"I saw Ravana, getting up quickly, in a bewildered state, terrorstricken, totally confused in intoxication. He had gone almost insane, naked uttering words of abuse. Plunged into a pool of filth and emitting foul smell he disappeared into a helllike dark chamber.
"There I saw the nightranger, Kumbhakarna and also Ravana's sons, their bodies smeared with oil.
"The tennecked Ravana was seen (this time) riding on a boar, Indrajit on a crocodile and Kumbhakarna on a camel all set towards the southerly direction.
"Only Vibhishana was under a white umbrella clad in white, with white garlands and white sandal paste.
"(Hailed by) the sounds of conches and drums, and of musicians and dancers, Vibhishana was seen ascending on to a decorated fourtust elephant which was huge like a mountain and trumpting like a thundering cloud. He stood there along with four ministers and reached the aerial region.
"I saw this delightful Lanka teeming with horses, chariots and elephants, archways and towers crumbling and falling into the ocean.
"In my dream I saw this city of Lanka  protected by Ravana burnt down by a powerful vanara, a messenger of Rama.
"Kumbhakarna and other demon leaders wearing red clothes entered into a pool of cow dung.
"(Therefore) go away from here. You will be totally destroyed by Rama who will secure his wife and will kill  all of you along with others in great anger.
"Rama will not approve of any one abusing or threatening his venerable, beloved wife, who had led a life of exile with him.
"Give up these cruel taunts. Speak to her in a cordial manner. We will beg Vaidehi's forgiveness. I like this kind of action.
"When any demoness in a sorrowful state dreams this kind of dream, she will be relieved of sorrow and will obtain supreme joy.
"O demonesses beg her (pardon) now even though you had threatened her earlier. Where is the need to hesitate? There is cause for concern for demons from Rama.
"O shedemons, this Janaka's daughter from Mithila who is capable of protecting you against great dangers will be pleased by your submission.
"Look at the signs on her body. There is not a little inauspiciousness in the limbs of the largeeyed princess from Mithila.
"I see the day of fulfilment for Vaidehi has drawn near. I can also foresee the destruction of the demon king and the triumph of Rama.
"This dream indeed served as an augery for good news about her. Look, her (left) eye which is large like a lotus petal is throbbing.
"The left shoulder of this great Vaidehi has started suddenly throbbing, indicating that she is feeling a bit happy.
"Her excellent left thigh, comparable to a female elephant's trunk is trembling, as though indicating that Rama is standing in her presence.
"One can see the bird which utters excellent sweet notes indicating happy tidings, entering again and again the foliage of the tree, a delightful bird, as if prompting Sita again and again to rejoice.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तविंशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the twentyseventh sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
After hearing the unpleasant words spoken by the king of demons, which caused restlessness and sorrow to Sita, she was terrified like the young calf of a lordly elephant fallen into the clutches of a lion in the midst of the forest.
Encircled by the demonesses, Sita was repeatedly humiliated by Ravana's cruel words. She wept like a young girl deserted in a desolate forest.
"Even though I am threatened like this, I am living pitiably because of lack of merit. Indeed I regret my survival due to my bad luck. Elders say that death will not ocurr before its time. It seems to be true.
"Even though I am devoid of joy, and living in deep agony, my heart bursts not into a thousand pieces like the summit of a mountain hit by thunderbolt (lightning).
"I will not be blamed if I commit suicide now.I stand condemned to death in the hands of this ugly Ravana. I cannot bestow my affection on him or surender to his desire like a brahmin would not like to impart Vedic knowledge to a nonbrahmin. (Better die of my own accord than be killed by a sinful ogre).
"If the lord of the world does not come here before that (time fixed by Ravana) the vile lord of demons will cut me into pieces with weapons just as a barber would cut to pieces the foetus with a sharp knife (in order to save a pregnant woman).
"Just like two mighty lions are killed by a bolt of lightning, the two princes must have been killed by a creature in the guise of a deer on my account.
"Verily, it is the spirit of the time that assumed the form of deer and tempted this unfortunate soul. It was foolish of me to send away, the sons of a noble king, Lakshmana and his elder brother.
"I am devoted to you and to no other god. My hardship in sleeping on the ground, my righteousness, my discipline and chastity have all proved futile like the devotion of an ungrateful person.
"This righteousnes practised by me is in vain like my devotion to you, as I am unable to see you. I am a separated, emaciated, pale with no hope of reuniting with you.
"Having truly fulfilled your pledge given to your father, you will return from the forest to Ayodhya, rid of all fear, as an accomplished person, will and revel in the company of largeeyed damsels, I think.
"O RamaI loved you and concentrated all my love on you for a long time only for my doom. I have observed vows and austerities in vain. I cannot continue it for long. Here I am giving up my life. Fie upon this luckless one (me).
"I will end my life at once by taking poison or else by a sharp weapon. Alas There is none to give get me poison or a weapon at this demon's residence".
Queen Sita was wailing in many ways, constantly remembering Rama, the soul of all. Shivering, her face pales as she approached the great Simsupa tree in bloom.
"Burning in grief, worrying in many ways, Sita took hold of her braid and said", by tying myself with this braid I shall quickly reach the presence of the lord of death".
Sita of delicate limbs approached the Simsupa tree and held on to a branch and stood. While she was thinking of Rama and Lakshmana and their noble family many  omens of proven results appeared on her auspicious charming body. These omens were dispellers of grief, and harbingers of courage in the world as declared from ancient times. (Now) they manifested themselves.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टाविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyeigth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Like wellwishers flocking round a person on whom fortune is smiling, omens foretelling auspicious happenings in near future appeared to Sita. She was unimpeachable. She was in agony, distressed in mind, bereft of all joy (now) standing under that Simsupa tree.
Her left eye with a row of curved eyelashes, the black pupils of the eye in white throbbed in an auspicious manner. The lady  with her long tresses, and throbbing eye appeared like a red lotus gently struck by a fish.
Her stout left arm curved beautifully, fit for excellent agaru and sandal paste once the pillow by her beloved lord for long, throbbed suddenly.
Again her roundshaped left thigh resembling an elephant's trunk started throbbing, presaging union with Rama.
Her eyes were pristine, teeth wellshaped. The goldhued auspicious sari on her charming limbs was now a little soiled on account of dust. It slipped slightly as she stood up. This augured well for her.
Reassured by such omens which augured well as tested by time, Sita, with beautiful eyebrows, and deep foresight experienced great joy, like a seed blighted by the wind and the Sun comes back to joyful life through a pleasing shower. (A foreteller is addressed as siddha in sanskrit dramas)
Her face shining with beautiful red lips like bimba fruit, sparkling teeth, and curved eyelashes with lovely brows extending up to her hair, she appeared like a Moon released from the mouth of Rahu.
Revered Sita, completely relieved of grief, exhaustion gone, fears allayed, mind illumined with joy, looked charming with her countenance as a night with the Moon fully risen during the bright fortnight.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकोनत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyninth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic compsed by sage Valmiki.
The valiant hero Hanuman heard everything including the lamentation of Sita and the dream of Trijata and the threats of the demonesses.
The sight of Sita who seemed a deity in the Nandana garden of Indra, set a chain of reflections in his mind :
"This is Sita whom thousands of vanaras are searching in all directions.
"Roaming everywhere incognito to ascertain carefully the strength of the enemy, I have seen everything.
"I have seen the ability of the demons and the citadel of Lanka. I have seen the power of Ravana the demon king.
"It is the opportune time for me to comfort Sita eagerly waiting to see her husband who is of immeasurable prowess and who is compassionate to all beings.
"The moonfaced Sita had never experienced sorrow before. She sees no end to her sorrow and suffering. I will console her.
"If I should return to Kishkindha without reassuring Sita, whose understanding has been clouded in grief I would be blamed.
"If I so back, this illustrious princess, Janaki will give up her life, finding no means of deliverance (from this tragic situation).
"I should provide some comfort to the strongarmed Rama with a face like the fullmoon yearning to see Sita.
"I cannot talk to her in the presence of these nightroamers. How can I  discharge my duty in this predicament?
"If I do not comfort her before the remaining part of the night ends, she will give up her life. There is no doubt about it.
"If Rama enquires about the message of Sita, this lady of beautiful waist, what can I speak without meeting and talking to her?
"If I leave this place without any message from Sita, Rama will burn me with his eyes full of great anger.
"If I get the lord of vanaras and his army for the cause of Rama (without talking to Sita), their arrival will be useless (if Sita would have given up her life by then).
"I shall wait and speak to her slowly and console this deeply distressed lady when I get a chance to speak to her (when  these ogresses are asleep).
"I am indeed of small size and that too a monkey. Nevertheless I shall speak in Sanskrit, a language of the common people. (as the shedemons cannot understand that language).
"If I speak like a brahmin in sanskrit language she would be frightened thinking that I am Ravana and how would a vanara speak?
"I will certainly speak to her meaningfully in the language of the people. Otherwise it is not possible to pacify the sinless Sita.
"Since Janaki has already been frightened by the demons, she will be even more terrified seeing me in this form and hearing me speaking this way.
By seeing me in this form, sensitive largeeyed Sita will scream loudly thinking that I am Ravana who can assume any form at his free will.
"If Sita screams, the  horde of terrific ogresses will at once gather, armed with dreadful weapons like Yama, the god of death.
"Then all these hideous ogresses will swarm round me and make efforts to capture me with all their strength and kill me.
"Seeing me holding big and small branches of large trees and leaping from one place to the other, the ogresses will get scared.
"These ogresses with their hideous faces will be frightened on looking at my huge form moving in this grove.
"Thereafter the ogresses will draw the attention of demon guards engaged by the king of demons at his residence towards me.
"Those ogresses due to fear will come speedily, armed with spears, tridents, swords and different kinds of weapons for a combat.
"With them around me, I may not be able to  reach the other end of the ocean (my strength spent in the combat.)
"The ogres who are in large numbers, here are very prompt to act. They will jump into the sky and bind me. Sita will not receive the message and I will be taken into custody by the demons.
"These demons who are keen on indulging in violence will harm Janaka's daughter. Then the mission of Rama and Sugriva will also fail.
"Janaki is staying in this untraceable location surrounded by demons. And this location is a secret place surrounded by the ocean .
"If I am killed in the combat or captured by the demons, I do not see another person who can help in accomplishing this task.
"When I am killed here, I cannot see any other vanara who can leap over a hundred yojanas of the ocean (to reach this place).
"I may be capable of killing even thousands of demons but thereafter (thoroughly exhausted) reach the other side of the ocean.
"Battles, no doubt, are unpredictable. Which wise man with a sound intellect will take up a doubtful work unhesitatingly?
"If I talk to Vaidehi it will be a great mistake on my part.If I do not speak to Vaidehi she may give up her life.
"Even well planned diplomatic missions fail like darkness dispelled at Sunrise if the messenger is confused and if the place and time are not propitious for them.
"Swinging from a course of action or an action leading to calamity is not proper. Messengers who assume that they are scholars (blinded by ego) destroy their mission.
"How can the mission succeed? How can failure of mission be avoided? How can the crossing of the great ocean be not wasted?"
Wise Hanuman came to a decision after reflecting in his mind about how not to create fear in Sita (while communicating with her.)
"By praising Rama who is very dear, who is judicious in action and in whom her mind is absorbed, I will not create fear.
"I shall present in auspicious words the esteemed Rama of Ikshvaku family who is a knower of self and make her listen to everything in such a sweet manner that she will trust me.
Highsouled Hanuman seated on the branch of the tree without being seen began to speak faithfully in praise of the lord of the universe in many ways while looking at her. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtieth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
After deliberating in several ways the great Hanuman spoke these sweet words to Vaidehi:
"There was an illustrious king called Dasaratha in Ikshvaku race, a master of chariots, elephants and horses. He was highly meritorious and renowned.
"He was the most virtuous among royal sages, equal to sages in austerity, born in the race of emperors and equal to Indra in might.
"He was committed to nonviolence, magnanimous, compassionate and one whose strength was truth. He was not only a prosperous king of Ikshvaku family but also a promoter of prosperity of others too.
"Endowed with signs of kingship and vast wealth, he was a bull among rulers of the vast earth, surrounded by the sea. A happy king himself, he was wellknown as a provider of happiness.
"His beloved eldest son Rama, whose countenance is like the full moon, is a scholar of all branches of knowledge and is foremost among the bowmen on earth.
"The scourage of enemies, he is a protector of righteousness and of his kins and all living creatures. He is an embodiment of righteousness.
"Honouring the word of his aged father who was ever steadfast in truth, Rama left for the forest along with his wife and brother.
"In the deep forest he went round hunting animals and killing the demon warriors who assumed any form at their free will.
"Ravana having heard about the killing of all demons at Janasthana including Khara and Dooshana in the forest, deceived Rama in the guise of a deer and abducted Janaki in anger.
"While looking for the goddesslike lady, the sinless Sita in the forest, Rama met a monkey called Sugriva and made friendship with him
"Rama, a powerful king, who can win enemy forts killed Vali and offered the monkey kingdom to Sugriva.
"Having received Sugriva's orders thousands of monkeys who can assume any form went searching for that divine queen in all directions.
"On hearing the words of Sampati I leaped the wide ocean swiftly crossing a hundred yojanas in quest of the largeeyed Sita.
"Surely I have seen here a lady of similar body, of similar complexion, of similar glow and beauty as described by Rama".
Having spoken thus, the great vanara stopped speaking after that. Janaki was wonderstruck by the words of the vanara.
Then Sita looked up at the Simsupa tree timidly, her face covered with beautiful curly hair.
On hearing Hanuman's words Sita looked at all directions and quarters while quietly contemplating on Rama, the self of all and experienced supreme joy.
She looked obliquely, up, and down and saw Hanuman of unimaginable intelligence, the minister of the monkey lord, son of the Windgod, who looked like the rising Sun.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfirst sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Sita got perplexed on seeing him (Hanuman), who was tawny in complexion and looked like a cluster of lightnings, clad in white  and hidden in between the branches.
There (on the tree) she noticed a monkey like a cluster of fully blossomed Ashoka flower, shining bright, whose eyes were glowing like pure molten gold, speaking softly and pleasingly.
Astonisted Mythili began thinking. 'Oh this vanara's appearance is frightening. He is terrible to look at. He is inaccessible'. Thinking over this again and again, she fainted.
Overcome with sorrow and fear, noble Sita sobbed pitiably muttering repeatedly. 'O Rama, O Rama, O Lakshmana'.
Noble Sita, seeing the best of vanaras who stood near humbly, began reflecting 'Is this a dream'?
Looking here and there, she saw a monkey with a large, curved face, an obedient servant and a minister of the monkeylord, the foremost among the intelligentia and the son of the Windgod.
The largeeyed Sita lost her senses looking at him. She got back her senses after a long time and started thinking again:
'Today I saw an ugly monkey in my dream. Its sight in a dream is inauspicious according to sastras. Let it be auspicious for Lakshmana and Rama for the sake of my father Janaka.
"But no, it was not a dream for tormented by grief and sorrow I cannot have a dream. When separated from the moonfaced Rama I have no sleep or pleasure, how can I have dream?
"I am always meditating upon Rama and thinking of him alone. I am talking about things related to him. Because of that I see him and hear him.
"I am tormented by intense love for Rama, with all my thoughts immersed in him. Since I am constantly thinking of him I see him and hear words about him. (She thinks it is all hallucination.)
"I feel it is only the desire in my mind. Desire has no form. But the one who is addressing me has a form. I cannot understand this.
"My salutations to Indra, Brihaspati, Brahma the creator and also to the firegod. Let all those words spoken by the vanara here in front of me be true and not other than that."इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्वात्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtysecond sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hanuman, son of the Windgod whose face shone like coral, dressed in a sober manner climbed down the tree, went close to Sita, offered salutations with his palms on his head and spoke in sweet words:
"O blameless lady with eyes like lotus petals, in crumpled silk, holding a branch, and standing, who are you?
"Why are tears of grief flowing from your eyes like water trickling down a pair of petals of white lotuses?
"O noble lady, are you a goddess or a demoness, a naga, a gandharva, a rakshasa, a yaksha or a kinnera?
"O beautiful lady Do you belong to the race of Rudras, or Marutas, or Vasus?. O noble lady, you appear a goddess to me.
"O lady of lovely black eyes who are you? Have you by any chance offended your husband out of anger or out of delusion? Are you the auspicious Arundhati dislodged for making your lord Vasistha angry?
"O woman of beautiful waist from which world have you come here? For whom are you worrying? Who is your son, father, brother or husband? Are you worrying about some one dead?.
"From your weeping, your sighing and your touching the earth (gods do not touch the earth) and your signs of sovereignty, I do not think you are a goddess (meaning otherwise she posessed divine grace).
"On the basis of your royal signs and other qualities I infer that you are the daughter of a king or his consort.
"If you are Sita, who was forcefully borne away by Ravana from Janasthana you may kindly reveal to me freely. May god bless you.
"Indeed your plight, the superhuman beauty and your robes marked with asceticism, surely tell me that you are Rama's queen."
Happy to have heard words of praise of Rama, Vaidehi spoke this to Hanuman, who got up the tree:
"I am daughterinlaw of king Dasaratha, knower of the self, the foremost among kings on earth and a slayer of enemy army.
"I am daughter of the great soul, Janaka, king of Videha, known as Sita. I am the wife of that sagacious Rama.
"I enjoyed worldly pleasures in abundance for twelve years at Rama's abode.
"Then in the thirteenth year king Dasaratha along with the royal preceptor arranged to  coronate Rama, delight of the Ikshvaku family, in the kingdom.
"While preparations for the coronation were on, queen Kaikeyi said to her husband:
'I shall not drink or eat food, if Rama is coronated. I shall end my life this moment.
'O Dasaratha, the foremost among kings if the promise lovingly made by you earlier is not going to be false, Rama should go to the forest'.
"Remembering the boons the ever truthful king had granted to Kaikeyi, he fainted after hearing her cruel and harsh words.
"The aged king who held on to truthfulness and righteousness begged his famed eldest son Rama to return the kingdom.
"The illustrious Rama who valued his father's word more than sovereignty, bowed to the command of the father.
"Rama, whose strength was his truthfulness, gave whatever others sought but would not accept anything in return. He would not speak a harsh word.
"Having given up the kingdom  voluntarily, Rama, a highly renowned king cast off his luxurious upper garments and asked me to take care of his mother.
"I, however resolved to live in the forest, marched ahead of him quickly as I did not prefer even heaven without him.
"Respecting the king's order and determined firmly, we entered the impenetrable forest.
"While the most valiant Rama was living in the Dandaka forest, I, his wife was borne away by the evilminded Ravana.
"He has allowed me two months time to live. After two months I will have to give up my life."इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रयस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtythird sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hearing the words of Sita who was overwhelmed with grief, the monkey leader Hanuman felt sad and thus spoke comforting her:
"By the command of Rama I am here as a messenger. He is keeping well. He is well and wishes you well.
"O godlike lady Rama, son of Dasaratha, master of the Vedas, wielder of Brahmastra wishes you well.
"The mighty Lakshmana too, a dear brother and follower of your husband is immersed in grief, and sends salutations to you."
On hearing the wellbeing of Rama and Lakshman, lions among men, Sita experienced thrill all over her body. She then  spoke to Hanuman:
"The adage that 'joy comes to a living being even though it be at the end of  a hundred years' is popular. It appears true in my case".
Hanuman thus created a sense of wonderful joy in her as they came together. Both of them started to converse restoring confidence in each other.
Hearing the reply of Sita, who was crying piteously, stricken with grief, the monkey leader, Hanuman moved close to her.
As Hanuman started slowly drawing close, Sita suspected he might be Ravana.
"Ohshame on me. I have told him my story which should not have been said. This is verily Ravana come in a disguise".
So saying Sita of flawless limbs, emaciated with grief, left the branch of Ashoka tree held by her and squatted on the ground.
The longarmed Hanuman saw Sita, who was stricken with grief and deluded with fear. He prostrated to her. But out of fear she did not look at him.
On seeing the vanara prostrated, the moonfaced lady, sighed deeply and spoke to him in a sweet voice:
"If you are that trickster Ravana who appears incognito before me, it is not good for you. You are causing grief again.
"You are the same Ravana who took the guise of a mendicant, giving up your real form and came to Janasthana.
"Oh you are one who can assume any form at will. You are a nightstalker. It is not good for you to cause pain to me who is already emaciated through fasting, who is pitiable and who is already afflicted.
"May be my suspicion is not correct Because I am experiencing pleasure in my mind in your presence.
"O great vanara, If on the other hand you have come here as Rama's messenger I wish you well. I love Rama's story. Tell me.
"O vanara Rama's virtues are dear to me to hear. O gentle one just as the current of the river wears away its banks, my mind is lured by your presence.
"Oh I have been seeing the person sent by Rama in my dream for a long time. This is a pleasant dream to me.
"Even if I can see the heroic Rama together with Lakshmana in my dream my pain will be gone. Even the dream is inimical to me (I cannot sleep and thus cannot dream.)
"I do not think it is a dream. Pleasure cannot be experienced by seeing a vanara in a dream. I experience pleasure now (seeing a monkey in a dream is a bad omen).
"Can this be a delusion of my mind or a mental imbalance (resulting in movement of the mind in the body). Is it a malady born of  my madness? Or is it a mirage?
"No, this cannot be insanity. nor even delusion. But I recognise this vanara well"
Considering the strength and weakness of demons in that manner Sita thought that Hanuman was none other than the king of demons who can asume any form at will.
Having entertained such thoughts, Sita, the lady with a fairwaist, daughter of Janaka,  did not respond to the vanara.
Hanuman, son of the Windgod understood what was going on in Sita's mind and spoke pleasing words that brought joy in her.
"Rama is glorious as the Sun, brings delight to the whole world like the Moon, is the king of kings like Vaisravana,  and renowned like Visnu endowed with valour.
"He is truthful in speech like Brihaspati, prosperous (like Kubera), sweettongued, handsome, graceful like Kamadeva.
"He shows anger to one who deserves it, he is the foremost charioteer of the world and he is a great self under the shadow of whose shoulders the whole world takes refuge.
"You will see the consequences of the action of Ravana who abducted you deceitfully in the form of deer when Rama was away from the hermitage.
"Heroic Rama will soon release many scorching, fiery arrows in anger and kill Ravana. I seek your permission as an envoy of Rama. Filled with grief by your separation, he has made inquiries about your welfare.
"The brilliant, longarmed Lakshmana, delight of Sumitra enquires about your welfare and offers salutations to you.
"O goddess like lady Rama's friend Sugriva, king of vanara chieftans inquires about your wellbeing.
"O Vaidehi Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva always remember you. Luckily you are alive even though you are under the clutches of shedemons.
"Very soon you will see mighty Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva of unlimited prowess surrounded by crores of vanaras.
"I am Sugriva's minister known as Hanuman, a vanara who entered the city of Lanka after leaping over the great ocean.
"Setting my foot with my valour on the head of the cruelminded Ravana, using my valour,  I came here to see you.
"O goddesslike lady I am not  a deceitful person as you suppose me to be. Shake off your suspicion as I speak to you and trust me."इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfourth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
On hearing about Rama from the bull among vanaras, thus spoke Vaidehi politely in a sweet voice:
"Where did you come in contact with Rama? How did you assess Lakshmana? How did an alliance of vanaras and humans take place?
"O vanara tell me all about the identification marks of Rama and Lakshmana again so that grief does not enter my mind.
"What does Rama look like? And Laksmana? How are his thighs, arms? Tell me".
Questioned thus by Vaidehi, Hanuman, son of the Windgod started describing Rama's physique as it is.
"O Vaidehi with eyes like lotus petals although you know your husband's and Lakshmana's form and distinguishing marks, it is my good fortune that you asked me (to describe them).
"O largeeyed lady I will describe those distinguishing marks of Rama and Lakshmana Listen.
"O daughter of Janaka Rama with eyes like lotus petals is a person born with a delightful form, richly endowed with indescribable charm and politeness.
"He vies with the Sun in effulgence, with earth in forbearance, with Brihaspati in intelligence, and in fame with Indra.
"Rama is a protector of the entire world of living beings not to speak of his own people. He is a protector of his own race. He guards righteousness. He is a scorcher of enemies.
"O beautiful lady Rama is a protector of the four classes of society (Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaisya and Sudra) in the world. He follows codes of conduct and makes others follow them.
"He is luminous and highly revered. He observes vow of selfcontrol. He is steadfast and recognises services rendered by sages. He is aware of the rites and the ways of administration.
"He is welltrained in statecraft. He is devoted to brahmins. Endowed with an excellent conduct, he is learned in scriptures and a scorcher of enemies.
"He is versed in Yajurveda and is respected by Vedic scholars. He has mastered Dhanurveda and other Vedas and auxillary Vedas as well.
"O godlike lady Rama has broad shoulders, strong arms, conchshaped neck and an auspicious countenance. With his fleshy round arms and copperyred eyes, he is renowned in all the worlds.
"His tone is resonant like drums, he has a beautiful, dark, shining complexion. He has symmetrical, well proportioned limbs. He is neither too tall nor too short.
"He has three stiff parts, three long parts, three even parts, three shining parts, elevated in three parts, has three raised parts, his body has lines in three parts and is  of coppery reddish colour in three parts. He has a majestic look.
"He has three folds in the skin of his neck and belly, is depressed in the middle of his soles and the nipples, undersized at four placesthe neck, penis, shanks and back, has three spirals on his head, has four lines under his thumb, has four lines on his forehead, he is a person with four cubits in height and symmetrical arms, cheeks and thighs.
"He is a person with his pairs of eyebrows, nostrils, eyes, ears, lips, nipples, elbows, wrists, knees, testicles, loins, arms, legs and buttocks in good symmetry he has four sharp teeth. He walks in different gaits like a lion, leopard, elephant and bull as occasion demands he has sharp nose, charming lips and jaws. He has smooth hair, eyes, skin, teeth and feet and his eight parts of his body namely back, trunk, limbs, fingers, toes, eyes and testicles are long.
"Ten limbs of the body resemble lotuses. He has proportionate limbs. He is known by the virtue of his spledour, fame and glory. Both his teeth and eyes are fair. Six parts of his body are elevated, nine parts of his body are fine and sharp. He pursues spiritual merit, worldly comfort and sensual delight in three periods of the dayforenoon, midday and evening. He always adopts the righteous way of life.
"He is ever established in truth and righteousness. He is prosperous and desires to accumulate wealth in order to shower favour on others. He knows the right use of time and place in discharging his duties. He has endeared himself to all by his words.
"His invincible brother Saumitri born of a different mother is a replica of Rama in affection, charm and virtues.
"While earnestly searching for you all over the earth both tigers among men came in contact with us.
"While both of them were wandering, searching for you all over the earth they saw Sugriva, the lord of animals who had been thrown out of kingship by his elder brother and was living on the mountain Rshyamuka frightened of him.
"Sugriva, king of vanaras who is committed to defend truth has been deposed from the kingdom by his elder brother. We keep attending on him.
"Both the princes clad in bark robes and armed with powerful bows reached the beautiful location of Rshyamukha mountain.
"On seeing the tigers among men armed with bows, Sugriva, the bull among vanaras jumped from the mountain deluded with fear and reached the peak.
"Thereafter the lord of vanaras staying on the mountain top quickly sent me to meet both of them.
"I recognised the true status of  both the mighty men who were filled with joy, placed them on my back, and reached the mountaintop.
"I reported faithfully about both the highsouled men to Sugriva. As they got to know each other through conversation a fast friendship developed between them.
"Then Rama, consoled Sugriva who was dethroned and abandoned on acount of a woman by his brother Vali, endowed with great prowess.
"Then Lakshmana spoke to the lord of vanaras, Sugriva about your loss and the grief caused to Rama, who is adept in accomplishing difficult deeds with ease.
"Having heard the words of Lakshmana, the king of vanaras became extremely lustreless like the Sun overshadowed by the planet Rahu.
"I collected the ornaments and gave them to Rama. He lost his senses on seeing the jingling ornaments scattered.
"The divine self who is effulgent like god wailed in many ways placing the beautiful ornaments on his lap.
"Rama looked at them and wept clasping them again and again in grief which inflamed like fire.
"Rama, the great self, immersed in sorrow lay down on the ground. I also consoled him with great difficulty and helped him to get up.
"Longarmed Rama along with Lakshmana looked at them again and again and gave them to the care of Sugriva.
"O divine lady on account of your separation he is ever blazing like a mountain of fire (Samvartaka).
"Rama is burning like a furnace by (three fires) sleeplessness, grief and intense anxiety just as the three sacred fires keep a firesanctuary intensely heated.
"On account of sorrow caused by not being able to see you, Rama of Raghu dynasty is shaken up like a lofty mountain is shaken by earthquake.
"Oh princess unable to see you, Rama has found no joy in roaming delightful forests, rivers and streams.
"Oh daughter of Janaka after killing Ravana, along with his friends and relatives Rama, the tiger among men, will meet you.
"(Having become friends) Rama and Sugriva together reached an agreement to kill Vali and search for you.
"Thereafter both the princes together arrived at Kishkinda and killed Vali, king of vanaras in a combat.
"Then Rama quickly killed Vali in a combat and made Sugriva the lord of all troops of vanaras and bears.
"Oh Illustrious lady In that manner alliance was established between Rama and Sugriva. Know me to be Hanuman, arrived here as their messenger.
"Having obtained his kingdom Sugriva despatched the vanara leaders to all ten directions (to search for you).
"Following Sugriva's orders, the powerful monkey leaders huge as the Himalayas, king of mountains went all over the earth (searching).
"Following Sugriva's orders, we, the monkeys, since then are moving about searching the entire earth eager to find you or to carry out Sugriva's orders.
"We wasted many nights and days immersed in disappointment (for not being able to find you) and we missed our path in the great Vindhya mountain.
"We decided to give up our lives due to disappointment, transgression of the time limit  fixed for us and fear of the monkey lord (fear of facing the king without finding you).
"We decided to give up our lives since we were unable to see the feet of the queen (Sita) even after searching the forest fortresses and the (banks of) mountain streams.
"When we were disappointed (in tracing you) and were at the point of death having been commanded by the king (that whosoever overstays would be killed) a gigantic powerful bird appeared to fulfil our task.
"That king of vultures, Sampati was the brother of king of birds Jatayu. Hearing about the death of his younger brother Sampati felt distresed and spoke in anger:
'O best of vanaras by whom was my younger brother killed? Where was he dropped down? I wish you to tell me all about that.
"Having heard about the death of Jatayu, O charming lady that Sampati Aruna's son felt sad and told us that you are at Ravana's palace.
"Having heard Sampati's encouraging words all of us led by Angada departed immediately.
"The happy monkeys were satisfied. Enthusiastic about seeing you, they rose from the Vindhya mountain and reached the limit of the sea  shore in the north.
"When the vanara army was feeling despondent at the sight of the ocean, I leaped across the sea, a hundred yojanas, pushing aside  all my fear.
"I entered at night the city of Lanka teeming with demons and saw Ravana and saw you immersed in sorrow.
"O sinless lady I have given you a faithful account. I am a messenger of Dasaratha's son. And you may speak now, O divine lady
"O divine lady Know that I have come here for your cause carrying out the mission of Rama. I am Sugriva'a minister and son of the Windgod.
"Your lord Rama of Kakutstha race, supreme among wielders of weapons is doing well. So is venerable Lakshmana endowed with auspicious signs engaged in serving him.
"O queen seeking the welfare of your Valiant husband I came here at the behest of Sugriva all alone.
"I can assume any form at my will. I searched for you without any help moving in the southern direction and reached this place .
"Fortunately for me I can finally dispel the fear of the vanara chiefs who are regretting your loss, by letting them know that you have been found.
"Oh queen luckily for me, crossing the ocean has not gone in vain. I am fortunate because I will attain fame of finding you.
"Mighty Raghava will take you after killing Ravana, the king of demons along with his kith and kin.
"Oh Vaidehi there is a famous mountain called Malyavan. From there a monkey called Kesari went to mount Gokarna.
"He (Kesari) is said to be my father by the divine sages. He retrieved a piece of land in a holy spot of that sea shore and killed Sambasadana, a demon who was oppressing righteous people.
"O Mythili I was born in that land retrieved by the Windgod. I am known as Hanuman by virtue of my own action.
"In order to inspire confidence in you about me I have narrated the virtues of your husband. O sinless queen Rama will take you from here very soon".
The griefstricken Sita trusted him by his logical presentation of reasons as well as identifications. She believed that he was a messenger (of Rama).
Janaki experienced immeasurable happiness and shed tears of joy through her curved eyes.
Her face with large eyes with a tinge of red corners shone like the Moon released from Rahu.
She realised that the monkey was none other than Hanuman. Then he looked at her who was pleasing to see and spoke again:
"Mythili, everything I intended to say has been narrated to you. Calm yourself down. What shall I do? Or else, tell me what pleases you. I shall go back.
"(My father) a mighty monkey killed Sambasadana in a battle on the command of a great seer. I am a vanara (born to a monkey) by the impact of the Windgod. I am equal to the Windgod in power."इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfifth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Mighty Hanuman, the son of the Windgod again spoke to Sita humbly to inspire confidence in her.
"O noble lady I am a vanara, an envoy of learned Rama. You see this ring with Rama's name inscribed on it, O godlike lady
"Be calm. Be blessed. Your sorrows have come to an end. This (the ring) is given by the great self, Rama, to make you trust me.
She received the ornament that adorned her husband's hand and gazed at it and felt delighted as though her husband had arrived.
Her beautiful countenance with large white eyes with a reddish tinge in the corners shone like the Moon released from Rahu.
Young Sita felt delighted about her husband's news and blushed. By praising him for his action, she pleased the great monkey.
"O foremost among the vanaras you have trespassed the abodes of demons all alone. You are mighty and capable and wise.
"You with your admirable prowess have reduced this ocean which is an abode of crocodiles stretching over a hundred yojanas to a cow's hoof mark.
"I do not think you are an ordinary monkey. You have no fear or excitement about Ravana. You are a bull among vanaras.
"O best of monkeys As you have been sent by Rama, the knower of the self, it is proper for me to converse with you.
"The formidable Rama will not send any one specially to me without testing him or knowing his valour.
"To my luck, righteous Rama who abides in truth and glorious Lakshmana who enhances the joy of Sumitra are keepng well.
"Indeed if Kakutstha is well wherefore does he not burn the oceangirdled earth in his rage as (the earth is burnt) at the time of dissolution of the era?
"Both of them are capable of subduing even the gods. I think the reversal of  my fate is reason for their inaction.
"Is Rama the greatest among men not depressed? Does he not feel helpless? He is (perhaps) taking necessary steps (for my recovery).
"I suppose prince Rama is not too depressed or perplexed to attend to his work. He will (perhaps) be doing the duties expected of a manly person.
"Tell me if Rama, scorcher of enemies, desirous of victory is following a twofold policy (confrontation and conciliation) A tough enemy cannot be defeated by following this method. A threefold strategy has to be adopted in this case (confrontation, conciliation and creation of dissension among his foes) to be victorious. I hope he is welldisposed to his friends and has a good team
"I hope he is making new friends, who desire his friendship. Hopefully, Rama is well honoured  by his allies.
"Does the prince ever seek the blessings of gods or fall back upon personal effort as well as providence?
"I hope Rama is not devoid of love towards me by  my separation. O Vanara, hope he will liberate me from this misery.
"I hope Rama who deserves happiness and not suffering has not become depressed now , having experienced a spate of sorrows.
"I hope he regularly receives news about the welfare of Kausalya, Sumitra and Bharata.
"I hope respectable Rama is not too absentminded for being immersed in sorrow on my account. Hope he will save me.
"Will Bharata, the devoted brother, send his formidable army of one akshavhini protected by ministers for my cause? I trust he will. (Akshauhini  109350 foot soldiers  65610 horse soldiers  21860 elephants soldiers on chariot)
"I trust that the illustrious Sugriva surrounded  by valiant vanaras who use their teeth and nails as weapons will reach this place.
"Hope heroic Lakshmana, enhancer of the joy of Sumitra, who has mastered the use of weapons will blow away the demons through a network of arrows.
"Can I hope to see Ravana and his relatives slain in the battle by fiery weapons in a short time?
"Hope, Rama's moonlike face without me with its golden complexion and lotus fragrance must not have been pale and withered with tears like the lotus in a pond scorched by the heat.
"Rama has given up sovereignty for the sake of establishing righteousness and led me into the forest on foot.He had not then felt any fear, anxiety or grief at heart.Rama showed patience, instead. Hope he retains them.
"His love for me is superior to his love for his father, mother or any one else. O messenger, I wish to survive till I hear any  news from my dear lord."
The godlike lady, having spoken to the vanara leader in a very meaningful and sweet manner about her beloved Rama, she remained silent, waiting to hear Hanuman's attractive words of description of Rama once again.
Having heard Sita, Hanuman endowed with fearsome power placed his folded hands on his head and said this:
"O lotuseyed one Rama knows not that you are here. Therefore he has not taken you away immediately as did Indra to rescue his wife Sachi.
"Kakutstha Rama will still the imperturbable abode of Varuna (ocean) by the torrent of his arrows and rid the city of Lanka of all the demons.
"Thereafter, whoever comes Rama's way,  be it  gods or demons or even death or any one else he will destroy them.
"O noble lady not being able to see you, Rama is immersed in an ocean of sorrow, he has no solace like an elephant tormented by a lion.
"O Sita I swear in the name of mountains like Malaya, Vindhya, Meru, and Dardura (the abodes of monkeys and bears) and  by the roots and fruits as well (which are the food of vanaras). you will soon behold Rama with beautiful eyes, red lips like bimba fruit, lovely earrings and a countenance resembling the full moon.
"O Vaidehi, you will soon see Rama seated on the Prasravana mountain just as Indra (who performed a hundred sacrifices) seated on the back of the king of elephants.
"Rama is not eating meat, nor drinking wine. He takes only the one fifth of a meal (sanctioned for an ascetic) available in the forest.
"Since you left, Rama has been always thinking sincerely of you, no longer drives away flies or mosquitoes nor insects or serpents from his body (his mind entirely fixed on you).
"Rama is always lost in thought. He is totally given to grief. Absorbed in love for you, he thinks of none else৷৷
"Rama, the best of men never goes to sleep and even if he drops off to sleep he mutters 'Sita, Sita' in a sweet voice in his sleep.
"Sighing deeply whenever Rama sees a fruit or a flower or any such delightful thing, he remembers you and calls you out again and again, saying, 'alas, my darling '
"O divine lady prince Rama is ceaselessly suffering. He keeps talking to you in air. The determined Rama is only thinking of your recovery ".
Her sorrow was mitigated by references made by Hanuman about Rama.She felt equally sad when she heard about Rama's agony. The princess from Videha appeared like a night at the advent of autumn, with the Moon looking partly muffled by clouds and partly bright.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षट्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtysixth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
To the righteous words (about Rama's grief) of Hanuman, Sita with a face like the full moon replied :
"O vanara you have told me that Rama has his mind always fixed on me, not on others and you have also said that he is sad. It is like offering me poison mixed with nectar.
"Death snatches a man tied with a cord, whether he is rolling in luxury or sinking in adversity.
"O best of vanaras surely it is not possible for living beings to overcome destiny. You see how Sri Rama, Saumitri, and my own self are all   afflicted with grief.
"When will Raghava reach the shore of this ocean of grief? He is like a man who has suffered a ship wreck, trying to swim?
"When will my husband see me after killing the demons including Ravana and uprooting Lanka?
"One year's time has been given (by Ravana) to me.  Rama should be informed to be quick in reaching before the completion of the time limit and that I will survive till then only.
"O vanara this is the end of the tenth month. Only two more months are left. This is the condition laid by the wicked Ravana in my case.
"Vibhisana made efforts to advise Ravana for my restoration. But Ravana has not agreed to that.
"Ravana did not like to return me having fallen into the death trap. Death lies in wait for him in battle.
"O vanara Nala the eldest daughter of Vibhisana sent by her mother came here personally and reported this to me.
"O eminent vanara no doubt my lord will soon reach this place. My pure conscience tells me that Rama has many virtues.
"O vanara Rama is endowed with perseverance, manliness, prowess, kindness, gratitude, competence and power.
"O bull among men he will not be shaken by calamities. Just as Sachi, the daughter of Puloma knows Indra's might I know Rama's.
"O monkey the valiant Rama is like the Sungod shoofing a dazzling volley of arrows which will dry up the sea of enemy forces."
While Sita, tormented with grief on account of Rama was thus speaking, her eyes filled with tears, the monkey said:
"On hearing me Rama will reach soon with a huge army of vanaras and bears.
"O beautiful lady, if you please, I shall redeem you today itself from grief. You may ride on my back, O blameless lady.
"Placing you on my back I shall cross the ocean. Indeed, I have the capacity to carry the entire city of Lanka along with Ravana.
"O Mythili Just as oblations offered to the sacred fire goes to Indra, I shall offer you today to Rama waiting on the Prasravana mountain.
Mighty Rama staying in asram ill be enthused to see you seated on my back like Lord Purandara (Indra) seated on the back of the lord of elephants (Airavata)
"O god like lady climb up my back. Do not be reluctant. Join Rama just as Rohini unites with the Moon, O beautiful one
"Climb on my back and cross the ocean through space in the flaming light, conversing with Moon and Sun.
"O beautiful lady it is not possible for all the inhabitants of Lanka together to follow me while I carry you from this place.
"O Vaidehi just as I reached here I shall beyond doubt take you on my back in the same way across the sky without any difficulty. See.
When Mythili heard the wonderful proposal from Hanuman, the best of vanaras, she experienced immense joy in every limb of her body and said:
"Hanuman how do you intend to carry me to such a distant place? Indeed, it is your monkey nature, I suppose.
"O bull among monkeys you have  such a small body. How can you intend to carry me from here to my husband, the lord of men"?
On hearing Sita's new belittling statement about him, Hanuman, the illustrious son of the Windgod reflected:
'Blackeyed Sita is not aware of my strength or my power. Therefore let her see the real (huge) form that I can assume at my free will'.
Thinking thus, Hanuman, the noble monkey, crusher of enemies, started revealing his real form to Vaidehi.
The wise bull among monkeys, jumped down from the tree and started growing in size in order to instil confidence in Sita.
Hanuman, the foremost of the vanaras resembling mount Meru or Mandara stood there glowing like blazing fire in front of Sita.
Resembling a mountain in size, with a red face, with teeth and nails strong like  diamond, the vanara in dreadful form said to Vaidehi:
"I have the capacity to carry away this entire Lanka uprooted with its mountains, gardens, forts, ramparts and gateways along with the king.
"O queen it is enough. Give up this unworthy attitude. Be stable. O Vaidehi, rid Lakshmana and Rama of grief".
Seeing the son of Maruta in dreadful form, the broad lotus petaleyed daughter of Janaka with eyes as large as lotus petals replied :
"O great monkey I have understood your strength and power. Your speed is like the Windgod's and your power is astonishing and splendid.
"O chief of vanaras how could an ordinary person be capable of reaching this land on far off shore of the immeasurable ocean?
"I know you are capable of carrying me on your journey. I am sure about the quick success of your mission which has been carried out after careful planning.
"O sinless and foremost monkey going with you is not proper for me. Your windlike speed will render me unconscious.
"When you fly over the ocean in the sky  speedily I may tumble down from your back by your speed out of fear.
"O destroyer of foes, it is not possible for me to go with you. Further, when you are burdened with a woman you will also fall into danger (because of me), no doubt.
"When I am seen (while being carried away) by the demons of fearsome valour they will pursue you, ordered by the wicked Ravana.
"O heroic monkey as the warriors armed with spears and maces surround you and attack, your life will be in danger, because of me.
"The demons are in large number and they will be armed with weapons. You are unarmed. How can you fight and protect me?
"O noble monkey while you are engaged in fighting with those demons of wicked deeds, I may drop down out of fear.
"O noble monkey the massive, fearsome and powerful demons may defeat you in the fight in any way.
"Or else, while you are engaged in fighting and turn your attention the other way I might fall down and the sinful ogres may bear me away.
"They may snatch me away from your hands or cut me to pieces. Success or defeat is uncertain in a war.
"In such a case, caught and intimidated by the demons I may die. Then your efforts will be wasted.
"It may be that you can kill  all the demons but by such an act the fame of Rama will be diminished. (He cannot give his strength a trial)
"Or else, the ogres will carry me  and conceal me in a secret place which the vanaras or Rama and Lakshmana may not know.
"O strongarmed Hanuman your life and the life of the great self Rama, of his brother, and relatives of your king is dependent upon my survival.
"Both Rama and Lakshmana who are emaciated with sorrow and suffering on account of me will give up their lives along with vanaras and bears.
"O chief of vanaras I cherish my devotion towards Rama alone and not touch the body of any other man.
"I had no control over myself. I was helpless and my husband was not present when I had to bear the touch of Ravana's limbs. What can I do?
"It will be proper if Rama comes here, kills Ravana along with all his relations and takes me away.
"I have seen and heard about Rama's conquest of enemies and his valiant deeds in war. Indeed, gods gandharvas, nagas or even demons cannot match him in war.
"O chief of vanaras who can withstand Rama accompanied by Lakshmana, the conqueror of enemies? His arrows resemble the rays of the Sun at the time of the deluge, steady like the elephants who support the quarters of the earth.
Satisfied with the words of Sita, the tiger among monkeys, who was eloquent in speech said:
"O queen O lady of auspicious appearance your words are most appropriate to and characteristic of a modest virtuous woman.
"It may not be possible for a woman to cross on my back the vast ocean stretching over a hundred yojanas. It is not possible for a woman.
"O humble lady the second reason given by you, 'I ought not to touch a person other than Rama' is well said and worthy of you, being the wife of the great soul. Who else can speak such words?
"O queen Kakutstha Rama will hear from me fully all that has been said and done by you in my presence without any omission.
"O queen my heart is drenched with love for Rama and desires to please him for many reasons. Therefore these words have been spoken by me.
"Crossing the ocean and entering Lanka are  difficult. But I accomplished it. Hence my proposal.
"I offered to take you today itself out of my love and devotion to Rama with a desire to unite you with him and not with any other intention.
"O blameless lady If you wish not to accompany me you may give me a token of identification to let Rama know about my coming here and seeing you".
Having heard Hanuman, Sita, a child of god, said these words in a low tone. Choked with tears, 'Carry this token of identity to my dear husband':
'Long ago we were staying at Siddhasrama. This hermitage was situated to the northeast at the foot of Chitrakuta mountain which was not far from the river Mandakini. It had abundant roots, fruits and water. You sported with me in the gardens which were fragrant with many types of flowers and ponds. You sat down on my lap with wet clothes in the hermitage'.
'Then a crow greedy of flesh began to peck my bossom with its beak. I took a clod of earth and warded him off.
'The crow was an eater of offerings, hungry for food began to peck me again and again for flesh.He did not stop.
'My upper cloth was slipping. I was trying to pull up my waist string angrily when you saw me.
'Then you made fun of me, and I became angry. I was abashed. Torn by the voracious bird I sought your shelter.
'Exhausted, I sat on your lap again. Seeing my angry face you pacified me. You were happy (to see me draw close).
'O lord when I was angered by the crow and my face was filled with tears, you marked me wiping my eyes.
'Totally exhausted I slept on your lap for a long time, and in turn you slept on my lap later.
'The crow came back again and clawed me in the space between my breasts even after I woke up after slumber from Rama's lap. Flying, it tore my bosom again and again.
'O strongarmed Rama, seeing my torn breasts, you became angry like a hissing serpent  and hissing said :
'O Sita with a beautiful lap like an elephant trunk by whom is your bosom wounded? Who is sporting with an angry fivehooded snake?
'Then looking around, you saw the crow facing me with sharp, bloodstained claws.
'This crow was the best of birds. He was surely Indra's son who had covered a long distance with great speed and his speed was like the Windgod's.
'Then you, the strongarmed and best among the wise, your eyeballs rolling in fury, made up your mind about the cruel crow.
'Taking out a blade of darbha grass from your mat, you invoked the weapon of Brahma by reciting the mantra. Then you discharged it which blazed like the fire of death and went spearheading towards the crow.
'Then you threw the burning darbha grass at the crow and it chased him in the sky.
'Then that crow flew to many places seeking asylum all over the universe chased by the blade of grass.
'Then the crow went round all the three worlds, having been rejected by his father Indra, including all the sages and gods. Refused by all he came back to Rama seeking shelter.
'Seeing the crow fallen on the ground, O Kakutstha, you who are a saviour of those who seek refuge saved him out of compassion, even though he deserved to be killed.
'Rama, you saw the crow in pain and despondency who returned to you and said that it is not possible to make Brahma's weapon ineffectual.You may tell now. (what should be done.)
'Then that crow said, 'let my right eye be blinded'. you then hit the right eye of the crow'. Thus the crow offered his right eye and saved himself.
'That crow offered salutations to you Rama and king Dasaratha, thereafter took permission and went to his own dwelling.
'(Addressing Rama as though he was present before her, Sita said) 'O lord of the earth for my sake you released the weapon of Brahma on a crow. What makes you excuse him who has abducted me?
'O bull among men you are so loving to me. I am like an orphan. Be kind to me. She who has found her lord in you stays without a protector.
'O my supreme lord I know you are kind, righteous, valiant, vigroous, mighty. You are boundless, calm and deep like the ocean. You are lord of earth and the seas and compeer of Vasava. I have heard from you that motiveless compassion is the best way to make one righteous.
'Even though you are an expert in the use of weapons, truthful and strong. (Yet) why are you not using weapons aganst the demons?'
(Now Sita turns to Hanuman and says) "In war serpents, gandharvas, demons or Marutas cannot withstand the speed of Rama's arrows and hit back.
"Does Rama have a little anxiety about me? If he has, why does he, a disciplined hero, not  put an end to the demons with his sharp arrows?
"Or, why does the mighty hero, Lakshmana, who is a scorcher of enemies, not come to my rescue taking the orders from his brother?
"Both Rama and Lakshmana are tigers among men who resemble wind and fire in power and have the unassailability of the gods. Wherefore are they disregarding me?.
"Perhaps I must have committed an atrocious sin. There is no doubt. For although both of them are scorchers of enemies, they deliver me not."
Hearing the piteous words of Vaidehi and beholding her eyes filled with tears, the Windgod's son, lustrous Hanuman replied thus:.
"O godlike lady Rama is not averse to your misery. On my word this is true. Rama is immersed in sorrow. Even Lakshmana wails.
"I could find you with difficulty. This is not the time to wail. O blameless lady take it, your sorrow has come to an end at this moment.
"Both the mighty brothers, tigers among men, are eager to see you. Both the princes will reduce this Lanka  into ashes.
"O largeeyed lady cruel Ravana along with his relatives will be killed by Rama in war and Rama will return to his city with you.
"Communicate your message to mighty Rama and Lakshamana, to brilliant Sugriva and even the vanaras who gather there.
"Hanuman having spoken this way, Sita, resembling a god's daughter, grieving, thus addressed Hanuman:
"Bow to Rama and offer salutations on my behalf. Inquiries concerning his welfare should be addressed to Rama, whom virtuous Kausalya bore as a son.
"Great, righteous Lakshmana had given up his pleasures and followed his brother Rama in his favour into the forest to be able to serve him.
"Lakshmana, who has lionshoulders and strong arms, who is handsome, who takes Rama as his father and treats me as his own mother.
"Heroic Lakshmana, did not know while I was borne away. He is prosperous, foremost in serving elders. He is energetic and reserved in his speech like my fatherinlaw. He is a prince dear (to his brother).
"Rama's brother Lakshmana is always dear to me. Heroic Lakshmana will discharge whichever responsibility is entrusted to him.
"He is Lakshmana for whose care and support Rama did not miss the noble king Dasaratha (during exile). Convey him my words of enquiry about his wellbeing.
"Lakshmana is soft, pure, competent and dear to Rama. O great vanara, act in such a manner that Lakshmana can mitigate my suffering. O great monkey, the best of vanaras you are competent in accomplishing this task.
"By your efforts alone my husband will try for my release. You may tell these words to my heroic husband, Rama, again and again.
"I will hold on to life  only for a month. Beyond, I will not survive. I swear by truth. You may tell this to Rama.
"O heroic Rama just as Kausik was rescued from the underworld it behoves you to deliver me from imprisonment of wicked Ravana".
Then Sita took out the exquisite and auspicious Chudamani worn on the head, untied from her clothes and gave it to Hanuman to be presented to Rama.
Then Hanuman, taking the extraordinary jewel and placed it on his finger as it was not fitting to his arm.
Having recieved the jewel from Sita and circumambulated her, Hanuman offered salutations to  her and stood by her.
Hanuman stood there physically, with great joy gazing at Sita, but mentally he was with Rama.
Having received the most precious jewel from the daughter of Janaka, Hanuman prepared to return like a mountain released from the impact of the wind.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyeighth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Sita gave the jewel to Hanuman and said, "This signet ornament is known to Rama very well".
"Seeing this jewel,Rama will recall three of us, my mother, myself and the king Dasaratha" (as this was given by her mother at her marriage.)
"Great Hanuman you are enthused now. You may think over the future course of action.
"O best of monkeys it is your  responsibility to carry out this task. O Hanuman think carefully of that. Take the initiative to reduce my suffering. I am confident that you can do it."
Hanuman possessed with fierce valour said to Vaidehi, 'so be it' and bowed his head, and offered salutations before he departed.
The noble lady, Sita, having been fully convinced about Hanuman and realising that he is about to start, her voice was choked with tears. She said these words:
"O Hanuman the great communicate my welfare  to both Rama and Lakshmana, to Sugriva, his ministers, elderly vanaras in righteous order.
"You must pacify the strongarmed Rama in a manner by which he will help me to cross the ocean of grief and rlieve me.
"Let the illustrious Rama take me alive. Help me with your (persuasive) words and you will acquire merit.
"On hearing your ever spirited words his manliness to get me back will be charged.
"Having heard Sita's words, Hanuman, son of Maruta, placed his folded palms over his head in reverence and replied:
"Kakutstha Rama, accompanied by vanaras and bears will reach here soon and conquer the enemies in war and relieve your grief.
"I do not see any one among humans or demons or even among gods who can face his arrows when released.
"Indeed, Rama is capable of conquering even the Sungod, or the raingod or Yama (the son of the Sun) specially for your sake.
"Rama is fit to rule the entire earth surrounded by the ocean. O delight of Janaka he will succeed in serving your cause."
On hearing the truthful, proper, pleasing words by Hanuman whom she held in great esteem, Sita said this:
Sita again and again looked at Hanuman who was about to start. She made him understand her words conveying her love for Rama.
"O destroyer of enemies if you think of halting for a day you may do so in a solitary location and leave tomorrow.
"Your presence will relieve me of my suffering, if you stay here for a while.
"O tiger among vanaras if you leave this place to come again, my life will be uncertain, (if your coming is uncertain). There is no doubt about it.
"My agony would be increased further by not seeing you. It would be inflamming my agony and I would be even more pained.
"O heroic chief of vanaras I am doubtful as to whether vanaras and bears can extend help?
"How can the army of vanaras and bears, for that matter, princes Rama and Lakshmana negotiate the ocean, which is difficult to cross?
"It is only three beings who have the capacity to leap over this ocean. Garuda, or you or the Windgod.
"What means do you, being the foremost hero among the three who are capable performing this difficult task, foresee?
"O slayer of enemy heroes if you alone can accomplish this task the fame of doing this will be yours.
"It would be worthy of Rama if he with his entire army emerges victorious over Ravana in a battle and takes me to his city.
"If Kakutstha (Rama), slayer of the enemy army fills the entire Lanka with his arrows and takes me, then his action will be worthy of him.
"You may make arrangement in such a manner that, that great self, the hero in war makes his victorious march which is worthy of him."
Having heard the meaningful, courteous and logical words of Sita, Hanuman replied:
"O Devi the lord of monkeys, Sugriva heads the army of vanaras and bears. He is richly endowed with satvaguna and is determined to accomplish your cause and free you from sorrow.
"O Vaidehi Sugriva will reach this place with thousands of crores of vanaras very soon and would kill all the ogres.
"Valiant, virtuous and powerful vanaras who can leap with the speed of mind are awaiting orders (of Sugriva).
"Their course cannot be impeded either upward, or downward or right or left. They  are indeed very brilliant and would never fail in any task.
"They have often circumambulated the earth including its oceans and mountains through the aerial path with great enthusiasm.
"The vanaras under Sugriva who move in the forest are more powerful than me or equal to me. None is inferior to me.
"If I have managed to come here, why not the other powerful ones? The superior leaders are not sent (as messengers). Only ordinary ones like me are.
"O noble lady therefore, give up your agony. Enough of your lamentation. The monkey troops will reach this place in one stride.
"Both the valiant Rama and Lakshmana, lions among men, looking brilliant like Sun and Moon will come to you riding on my back.
"Both the heroes, Rama and Lakshmana will come and blow up the city of Lanka with their unfailing arrows.
"O beautiful lady Raghava, the delight of the Raghu race would kill Ravana and his kins and return with you to his city৷৷
"Therefore, count the days and rest assured. Let it be auspicious to you. You will shortly see Rama burning like fire.
"When Ravana is slain, with his sons, ministers and kith and kin, you will reunite with Rama as Rohini unites with the Moon.
"O queen Mythili you come to the end of your sorrow and will soon see Ravana killed by Rama".
Having thus consoled Vaidehi, Hanuman, son of the Windgod resolved to depart. Once again he spoke to Vadehi:
"Very soon you would see the slayer of foes, who is an accomplished wielder of the bow (Rama) along with Lakshmana at the entrance of Lanka.
"You will soon see heroic vanaras whose weapons are their teeth, who are like lion and tiger in their valour. They are (mighty) like wellbred elephants.
"O respectable lady you would see many troops of vanara chiefs who resemble clouds hovering on the mountain peaks of Lankaroaring.
"Rama is tormented by the dreadful arrows of the god of love pierced into vitals, like an elephant hit by a lion. He has no happiness in life.
"O devi weep no more.Entertain no unpleasant thoughts.You have a great husband, just as Sachi has her lord Indra.
"Who is superior to Rama? Who is equal to Lakshmana? Both the brothers are like Fire and Wind. They are your refuge.
"O noble lady You will not stay longer in this country, which is a strong hold of hosts of demons and a dreadful place It will not be very long before you unite with your beloved. Pray, have  patience till then.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकोनचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyninth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Sita who was like the daughter of the gods heard the son of the Windgod for her benefit and replied:
"O vanara just as the earth feels happy when the half grown crops receive rain, I feel happy after seeing you. You have been speaking pleasing words
"Be kind to me and act in such a manner that I may embrace my lord passionately with my body emaciated with grief.
"O best leader of vanaras remind Rama about the incident of the release of a blade of grass in anger blinding one of the eyes of the crow narrated to you.
'(Further remind him), 'When my tilaka mark was erased, you painted tilaka with a stone (manassita pigment) nearby. O Rama you should remember that (incident).
'Rama you are like Indra and Varuna in valiance. How are you tolerating Sita seized, dwelling among the demons?
"O sinless Rama this wonderful Chudamani of mine has been carefully safeguarded. Seeing this is like seeing you when I am in distress.
"I am sending you this (Chudamani) born of the sea. O glorious Rama and now engrossed in grief it is not possible for me to live.
"I am tolerating this unbearable grief, and the words of the dreadful ogresses piercing my heart. Only for you.
"O subduer of enemies O prince I will hold on to life only for a month. I will not survive beyond a month in your absence.
"The demon king is frightful. He looks at me with immoral (lusty) eyes. I do not wish to live even for a moment after hearing about the adversities (you have faced)."
Hearing the words of Sita who was weeping piteously, brilliant Hanuman said this:
"O irreproachable lady I swear by you that Rama has grown averse to everything out of grief of separation from you. When Rama is in grief even Lakshmana gets immersed in sorrow.
"O beautiful lady somehow I could meet you. This is not the time to worry about. You will see the end of suffering at this very moment.
"Both the princes are tigers among men and crushers of enemies. They are determined to see you, and will reduce Lanka to ashes.
"O largeeyed lady Killing in war the vile Ravana, the demon king and all his relatives, Rama would take you back to his own city৷৷
"O unimpeachable lady give one more identification which would make him more happy".
"I have already given the best identification. When you hand this jewel used on my hair to him,  he will believe what you tell him".
The illustrious vanara held the ornament, prostrated to Sita and prepared to depart.
Seeing Hanuman eager to leap, enlarging his body quickly, she appeared pitiable with her face filled with tears and throat choked.
"O Hanuman to the lionlike brothers Rama and Lakshmana, to Sugriva  including his ministers and to every one convey my good wishes.
"You should make efforts in such a manner that the mightyarmed Rama will help me in crossing the cean of sorrow.
"Foremost vanara tell Rama about my intense grief as well as the threats of the demons. May your journey be happy.
Hanuman understood the message of princess Sita and felt delighted at heart at his accomplishment. Considering the small task yet to be accomplished he reached the northern shore mentally (He thought of Rama who waited in Kishkinda which is in the northern direction).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortieth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Having been honoured and praised by Sita's words, Hanuman prepared to depart from Sita's presence.
'With demons, negotiation is of no use. They are wealthy, they need no gifts. Proud of their stregth, the demons will not yield to dissension. I think only by using power it can be done.
'Other than power, there is no way to accomplish the task of ascertaining their strength. If I slay a few strong ogres somehow they may soften a little and yield.
'He, who can perform tasks in addition to the objective accomplished without affecting it, is really worthy.
'There are ways more than one even to perform a small work. And the capable know it.
'If I ascertain the difference in the strength of enemies and vanaras in war here itself and return to Kishkinda, the abode of vanaras, then I would have executed the orders of my lord properly.
'How can I have enduring war with the ogres today? How will my visit to this place end in happy return? Only in a combat this tenheaded Ravana will guage his strength and mine
'I can return happily only after I gauge the tenheaded Ravana's army in war, his strength, his companions including the ministers and his mind.
'This Ashoka garden of Ravana filled with different kinds of trees and creepers is a feast to the eyes and mind. It is an excellent garden like the Nandana  garden of Indra.
'I will devastate this garden, just as fire destroys a dried up forest. This will enrage Ravana.
'Then the demon king will order the horses, chariots and elephants and army equipped with tridents and spears to march against me. A great war will take place.
'I will fight with the ogres sent by Ravana, endowed with fierce strength and irresistible valour. After destroying their army I will go to the abode of vanaras happily'.
Furious Maruti endowed with fierce valour started uprooting the trees with the speed sprung from his thighs like the Windgod.
Then Hanuman felled a variety of trees and vines inhabited by intoxicated birds in the beautiful garden meant for womenfolk.
That garden looked ugly with uprooted trees, breached ponds and powdered mountain peaks.
Vines and trees wilted, birds shrieking, the embankments of ponds destroyed, its tender coppery red shoots withered, the garden looked as though it is burnt by forest fire and the climbers looked like women shivering in fear with their robes disarrayed.
The great garden lay disfigured, with the arbours and the picture galleries ruined, huge serpents and wild animals scattered, with stone houses and sheds destroyed.
The pleasuregarden of Ravana appeared as though it was spreading the creepers of sorrow, since it was totally destroyed by the monkey who had set out to protect a woman. प्रमदावनस्य  of the pleasure garden, प्रमदाअवनस्य of the hero who came to protect a lady.
The great vanara having perpetrated mischief, rousing anger in the mind of the great lord of wealth, stood at the exit doorway ready to combat singlehanded with many warriors in that  mighty army blazing in glory.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfirst sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The residents of Lanka panicked at the shrieking sounds of birds and cracking sounds of trees.
The frightened beasts and birds ran and flew, screeching in all directions. Fierce portents appeared to the demons.
Hideouslooking ogresses, awakened from sleep, saw the garden devastated by the heroic Vanara.
When the powerful, mighty and strongarmed Hanuman saw the ogresses he assumed a very huge form in order to strike terror in them.
Then, seeing the huge body of the mighty vanara resembling a mountain the ogresses questioned Janaki about him.
"Who is he? By whom has he been sent? From where and why did he come here? What dialogue  did you have with him?
"O lovely, largeeyed lady O auspicious one have no fear. What conversation did he have with you? Tell us".
Chaste and beautiful Sita said, "How do I know about the ogresses who assume many fierce forms?"
"You alone can know about who he is and what he is about. A serpent alone knows the movement (footprints) of another serpent. There is no doubt about it.
"I am also scared of him. I do not know who he is. I think he is a demon, who came here assuming a form of his choice.
LIstening to Vaidehi's words the ogresses divided themselves and fled in all directions. While some stood there, others went to report to Ravana.
The uglyfaced ogresses went to the presence of Ravana and reported about the frightening form of the vanara.
"Your majesty an extremely powerful and frightening Vanara had a dialogue with Sita. He is stationed in the midst of Ashoka garden.
"The deereyed Sita is not willing to disclose to us his identity even when we questioned her.
"He may be an envoy of Indra or Kubera or of Rama sent with an intent to trace Sita.
"Your beautiful pleasure garden filled with a variety of beasts has been ruined by this wonderful figure.
There is not a single place that has not been ruined by him there. Only the place where Janaka's daughter, Sita is resting has not been touched.
"It is not clear whether he spared that place for protecting Janakai or he stopped due to exhaustion. What is fatigue for him? It must be to save her that she is spared by him.
"He has spared the simsupa tree with lovely, tender leaves and flowers which is a chosen  resort by Sita.
"Your highness should take severe action on that person of fierce appearance with whom Sita dared to speak, and by whom the garden is ruined.
"O lord of the demon clan Who dares to talk to Sita if he has not given up all hope of life, since she is desired by you".
On listening to the report of the ogresses, Ravana, the lord of demons flared up like blazing flame of a sacrificial fire, his eyeballs rolling in rage.
From his angry eyes fell down drops of tears just as burning drops of oil drip from two burning lamps.
Then powerful Ravana commanded heroic demons called kinkaras who vied in strength to catch Hanuman.
Eighty thousand powerful  kinkaras (a clan of demons), largebellied, with large teeth and of dreadful appearance, swift in action, armed with hammers and clubs marched from there, resolved to capture Hanuman.
The kinkaras rushed towards the leader of vanaras who stood near the archway like the moths rushing towards the flame.
They assailed Hanuman with iron maces, crowbars edged with gold and shining arrows resembling the Sun.
They quickly surrounded Hanuman and stood with hammers, sharpedged spears, tridents, barbed missiles and powerful javelins.
Gigantic Hanuman, illustrious and brilliant, roared and waved his tail striking it with force on the ground causing loud sound.
Hanuman, son of Maruti, enlarged his body to a huge size and patted himself wildly  making loud noise that echoed the entire Lanka.
By the highly frightening sound caused by Hanuman patting, the birds from the sky fell down making a loud noise and Hanuman proclaimed in a loud voice as follows:
"Victory to Rama, the mighty and powerful, Victory to Lakshmana. Victory to king Sugriva who is ruled by Rama."
"I, son of the Windgod, destroyer of hostile armies, am a servant of Rama, the lord of Kosala kingdom, a man of unwearied action.
Even a thousand Ravanas will not match me in strength when I pound stones and trees in a thousand ways.
"I shall destroy the city of Lanka and pay my respects to Mythili right under the nose of all demons. I will return with my purpose accomplished.
Terrified on hearing the roar, the kinkaras looked at the towering Hanuman who seemed like a cloud in twilight (red in colour).
Obeying their king's commnad, putting aside their fear, the kinkaras freely attacked the vanara  from all directions with dreadful weapons.
Extremely powerful Hanuman surrounded by heroes all over, on his part went to the archway and picked up a terrific iron beam.
Hanuman, the mighty hero, seized the iron beam and struck the kinkaras, just as Garuda, the son of Vinata shoots up a struggling serpent and starts taking strides in the sky with the weapon in his hand (like Indra with his thunderbolt did with demons).
The great Windgod's son killed the kinkaras, and returned to the archway desiring further combat.
Then a few surviving ogres took to their heels after getting over that shock and reported to Ravana of the destruction of the kinkaras in the combat
The mighty demon king having heard about the killing of the formidable army of ogres, his eyes rolling in rage, commanded the son of Prahasta, who is difficult to conquer and matchless in war.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्विचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortysecond sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Having slain the kinkaras, Hanuman stood and reflected, ' I have ruined the garden and not the palatial buildings that are like temples (Chaityas)'. Then Hanuman, son of the Windgod, decided in his mind to show his strength and jumped on to the top of the palatial building that appeared like the peak of mount Meru.
The powerful vanara leader climbed the tall, palatial building which resembled a mountain. He looked like another Sun, just risen.
Having destroyed the fine palace building, the indomitable Hanuman was blazing with glory like the mountain Pariyatra. (one of the seven Kula mountains viz., Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, Shuktiman, Riksha, Vindhya and Pariyatra)
Hanuman heaved his body  huge  with his prowess and patted his arms loudly filling the city of Lanka with that terrible sound.
By the deafening sound caused by the patting, the birds fell down and the guards of the palace lost consciousness.
'May Sri Rama, unsurpassed in the use of missiles be victorious May his brother, mighty Lakshmana, a matchless warrior be victorious. May King Sugriva ruled by Rama be victorious.'
'I am the son of the Windgod, destroyer of enemy army. I am a servant of Rama, the king of Kosala who can accomplish any task with ease.
'Not even a thousand Ravanas can stand my might  in combat as I start assailing them with thousands of  rocks or even trees.
'I shall return only after accomplishing the destruction of the city of Lanka and offering obeisance to Sita, while all demons keep looking at me'.
Having made proclamations that way from the top of the Vimana (palace) the monkey leader roared making terrific sound frightening the ogres.
Hearing the terrific sound, a hundred gigantic guards of the palace set forth, holding different kinds of weapons like darts, swords and axes and hurled at Maruti surrounding him.
Holding astonishing maces decorated with gold, iron crowbars and sharp arrows resembling the rays of the Sun the ogres hit Hanuman, the foremost of vanaras.
The demons surrounding the great monkey looked like a big whirlpool of the water of the river Ganga.
Thereupon the infuriated son of the Windgod, assumed a fearsome form, uprooted a pillar of the palace decked with gold and holding that hundred edged pillar whirled it round swiftly.
Thereafter fire was generated (through friction) and with if the palace blazed. Hanuman saw the palace burning. He killed a hundred demons there as Indra killed demons with his thunderbolt. (The whirling pillar that generated fire apeared like a thunderbolt) Later he stood in the air and proclaimed this:
"Thousands of huge and mighty monkeys, equal to me, loyal to king Sugriva, are coming under the orders and have been recruited from the entire earth. They  are the best among monkeys.
"Of them some have the strength equal to ten elephants, others are ten times stronger, and still others have a thousand elephants' strength.
"Some have the strength of flood waters, some are powerful as wind and yet others have strength beyond measure.
"Sugriva will come here with hundreds of thousands of crores of vanaras who would be fighting with their teeth and nails as weapons.
"You have established great enmity with the noble lord of Ikshvaku dynasty. Neither this Lanka will endure nor you, nor even Ravana will be traced.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortythird sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Commanded  by the demon king, Jambumali the invincible son of Prahasta, who had large teeth in front, big rolling eyes, red flower garland, red robes and a chaplet with beautiful earrings. He went round twanging his producing thunderous sound. His arrows were huge, shining and beautiful.
All directions including the intermediate directions and the sky were filled with that loud sound produced by his twang.
Seeing him coming in a chariot drawn by donkeys, Hanuman who was swift to act was glad (to have an opportunity to fight) and made a loud noise.
Strongarmed Jambumali with his sharp arrows hit great Hanuman who stood on top of the exit archway.
Jambumali released a crescentshaped arrow on the face, one earshaped (barbed) arrow on the head and ten iron arrows into the arms of the lord of monkeys.
His red face struck by an arrow appeared like a fullblown lotus in autumn season hit  by  the rays of the Sun.
His red face  stained with blood was glowing bright like red lotus in the sky sprinkled with drops of red sandal.
Struck by the shafts of the ogre, the great monkey was enraged and happened to see a huge,  heavy rock lying beside him on the ground.
Powerful Hanuman with all vehemence lifted the rock and hurled it at the giant which he angrily smashed with ten arrows.
Hanuman, a strong, powerful and fierce warrior pulled out a sala tree and whirled it. Seeing that his attempt has failed.
Gigantic Jambumali seeing the mighty Hanuman whirling the sala tree fired many arrows at him.
He struck the sala tree with four arows, the arm of Hanuman with five arrows, chest with one, the hollow of the chest with ten more arrows.
Hanuman filled with arrows all over his body, seized an iron spear (which he made use of in the initial battle) and impetuously spun it in  intense anger.
Hanuman of immeasurable strength hurled the iron spear after turning it round and round at high speed on the broad chest of Jambumali.
Neither his head could be discerned nor his arms, knees, nor bow, chariot nor donkeys. Nothing was seen.
Mighty Jambumali killed  by that blow dropped down dead at once with his ornaments reduced to powder.
Ravana's eyes became bloodshot in anger when he heard about the death of Jambumali and of the strong army of kinkaras.
When the mighty son of Prahasta was killed, infuriated Ravana, his eyes red and rolling, commanded the highly valiant sons of ministers.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुश्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfourth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Commanded by Ravana, the seven sons of minister blazing like fire followed by large army of experts in archery, possessing great valour, armed with weapons, being distinguished wielders of weapons, skilled in the use of weapons, who were equally capable of conquering each other sallied forth gladly to fight with Hanuman. They drove chariots yoked with horses which were decked with golden mesh, holding totem staffs (a figure engraved to identify a hero) and flags, neighing like clouds. The valiant  heroes were sporting and making sounds like stormy  clouds wielding wonderful bows glittering like molten gold, shining like lightning. As they marched from the palace they looked like  stormy clouds accompanied by lightning.
Their mothers and relatives and their friends were struck with grief when they learnt about the kinkaras killed.
The barnished golden ornaments worn by them were shining as they brushed shoulders with one another (eager to fight first) to attack Hanuman who stood waiting at the main archway.
They went roaring with their chariots rattling, sending forth torrents of arrows like the stormy clouds thundering.
Later, Hanuman covered with showers of arrows scattered all over appeared like the king of mountains shot with showers of rain.
Then the monkey moving fast in the clear sky rendered the arrows of the giant heroes and speeding chariots futile.
Sporting in the sky with the giants who held bows in their hands, Hanuman shone like the powerful Windgod sporting in the sky surrrounded by rambling dark clouds.
Valiant Hanuman making terrific sound and frightening the army of ogres marched swiftly.
The scorcher of enemies, Hanuman hit some ogres with his palm, some with his feet and some with his fist and pierced some with his nails.
The monkey strangled some with his chest and some between his thighs. A few fell down dead on the ground hearing his roaring noise.
Struck by fear on seeing Hanuman, the seven sons of ministers dropped down dead on the ground, and their army fled in all the ten directions.
The elephants trumpeted discordantly out of fear, the horses fell down on the ground and even the chariots with seats, parasols and flag staffs broken were strewn all over the ground.
Streams of blood flowed and Lanka was filled with many kinds of horrifying sounds of cries.
Having killed the ogres who were old and strong, the valiant and mighty Hanuman, wishing to slay the other ogres advanced towards the archway.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfifth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Coming to know that the seven sons of the ministers were slain by the great vanara,  Ravana, who had concealed his feelings of agony thought of a good plan.
The tenheaded Ravana, eager to capture Hanuman, commanded his five army Generals called Virupaksha, Yupaksha, Durdhara, Praghasa and Bhaskarna, who were great warriorstatesmen valiant and, equal to wind in speed.
"O Army generals march with a large, strong army with horses, chariots and elephants and punish the vanara.
"Go to that forestdweller and make all efforts to impose on him punishment appropriate to time and place (keeping in view the harm he has done).
"Judging again and again from all actions, I do not think he is an ordinary monkey. He is a being endowed with great strength.
"To me it appears he is created by Indra with his ascetic power (for punishing us). I have subdued nagas, yakshas, gandharvas and even gods, asuras and ascetics with your help. So you should certainly bring him here without doing any harm. Capture the monkey forcibly. Do not insult that mighty monkey.
"Earlier I have seen monkeys of immense prowess, like Vali and Sugriva as well as Jambavan, the bear. Also I have seen the army general, Nila, Dvivida and others. They do not have such tremendous splendour or movement valour, intellect and strength and energy. They did not have such ability to change form at their will.
"It should be understood that he has taken the form of a monkey. You have to put in extraordinary effort to capture him by acting in a suitable manner.
"Even Indra, suras, asuras and humans and the three worlds together are incompetent to stand before you in a battlefield.
"Even then, you should safeguard yourself with great effort adopting warstrategies in an intelligent  manner to be victorious, for success in war is uncertain.
Taking King's order, the strong and swift warriors, resplendent as the flame of sacrificial fire sallied forth with their army on chariots, on the back of rutting elephants,  some on swift horses equipped with sharp weapons of many kinds.
The heroic giants caught sight of the vanara, who was blazing  encircled as though he was by the rays of his own glory, looking like the rising Sun. He was endowed with extraordinary agility, intelligence, and tremendous strength standing, waiting at the archway.
Having observed the tremendous strength, intelligence and swiftness in action of Hanuman, the generals of the army positioned at all directions and assailed him with dreadful weapons.
Durdhara pierced into the head of Hanuman with five sharp arrows and polished steel shafts with yellow tips (gold) shining like red lotus petals. They were like petals of lilies thrown on the head of Hanuman (causing no pain).
With five arrows pierced in the head of the vanara, Hanuman leaped into the sky with terrible roar, which resounded in all the ten directions.
Then the powerful, hero, Durdhara, mounted on his chariot, fastened his bowstring and hit Hanuman with hundreds of sharp arrows.
The great monkey kept away the showering arrows like the wind prevents raincloud from showering rain drops at the end of monsoon.
When the son of the Windgod was attacked by Durdhara, he again grew in size
Hanuman suddenly leaped far off into the air at high speed and fell on Durdhara's chariot just like a thunderous lightning falls on a mountain.
Having lost his chariot, the horses yoked to it killed, its axle and pole broken to pieces, Durdhara fell down dead from the chariot.
Seeing the body of Durdhara fallen on the ground, enraged Virupaksha and Yupaksha, the unassailable crushers of enemies leaped towards him.
As the strongarmed vanara stood stationed in the clear white sky both the generals leaped into the sky and hit him all of a sudden with two iron hammers.
Powerful Hanuman, an equal to Garuda in valour fell down while resisting the swift generals.
Then the son of the Windgod seized a sala tree uprooted it, lifted it and smashed the two giant generals with it.
Finding all the three generals dead, swift Praghasa advanced towards the Vanara and attacked him. Valiant Bhasakarna also lifted a trident and attacked him. Both were famous for swift and violent action in war
Praghasa fought back the glorious tiger among vanaras with a sharp crowbar on one side and Bhaskarana attacked with a spear from the other.
Attacked by both the generals, the fur on the vanara's body was smeared with blood from his wounded limbs, shining like the rising Sun smeared with blood became furious.
Hanuman, a courageous and mighty elephant among the monkeys uprooted a mountain peak along with its animals, serpents and trees and killed both the demon generals.
When the five army chiefs were killed, Hanuman began to destoy the remaining army force.
The vanara pitted horses against horses, elephants against elephants, warriors against warriors and chariots against chariots as Indra destroyed demons.
There was no path (one could not move forward) with elephants, and horses killed and with broken axles of great chariots and smashed chariots spread all over the way.
Then the heroic monkey having killed the army generals and their army and destroyed their vehicles in war came back to the archway after reviewing and stood like the timespirit bent upon the destruction of humanity.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षट्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortysixth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hearing the sad news of death of the five army generals including their followers and destruction of their vehicles, King (Ravana) gave a suggestive look at prince Aksha who was inclined to fight the war.
Spurred by the mere glance of Ravana, the glorious Aksha with his wonderful bow inlaid with gold sprang up from the royal assembly just as flame rises from firesanctuary when oblations are poured in by reputed brahmins.
Ascending a glittering chariot inlaid with pure gold Aksha, the courageous bull among giants looking splendid like the rising Sun, marched forth towards the great vanara.
The chariot was (strong as it was) gained by his austerities of high order. It was overlaid with pure gold armour, fixed with flags, and staff, studded with precious gems, yoked to the best of eight horses and endowed with the speed of mind.
(The chariot) was unassailable to suras or asuras.It moved without touching the ground, it could fly in air and had the splendour of the Sun. It was equipped readily with quivers, eight swords, javelins and clubs placed in right order.
Prince Aksha, whose courage was equal to that of gods, shone like the Sun. He ascended the splendid chariot decked with golden garlands shining like Sun and Moon, equipped with all weapons, bows and shields etc, he went out.
Seated on the chariot he (Aksha) sallied forth along with the army filling the entire earth and mountains with the sounds of horses, elephants and rumblings of big chariots and reached the portal where the great vanara stood.
The lioneyed Aksha saw the vanara who appeared like the cosmic fire at the time of dissolution of the universe. The prince was astonished and struck with awe (at the majestic form of the Vanara) and looked at him with great  respect.
Aksha, the mighty prince judging the speed and prowess of the monkey with his own in confronting enemies and the strength of the monkey, began to swell up in spirit like the glow of the Sun at the end of winter.
Knowing that it is difficult to win Hanuman who was steady and of irresistible valour Aksha was angry. Remaining steady, with full attention, he provoked the vanara to fight and released three sharp arrows.
Then Aksha contempuously looked at Hanuman who had conquered his fatigue and was determined to defeat the enemy. Holding in his hands his bow and arrows proudly, he reflected.
Adorned with armlets studded with golden coins and lovely earrings Aksha advanced instantaneously to meet the monkey. Their matchless combat excuitement and enthusiasm even among gods and demons.
Witnessing the fight between Hanuman and Prince Aksha, even the earth shrieked in agony, the Sun became dim, the wind stopped blowing, mountains were shaken, the sky thundered and even the ocean was agitated.
Heroic Aksha, who was good at targeting correctly, with due  concentration struck the vanara on his head with three goldenshafted, winged arrows with feathers smeared with poison which resembled serpents.
With the three arrows shot on his forehead simultaneously his eyes were drenched with flowing blood and with arrows shining like rays he appeared like the rising Sun, garlanded by glowing rays.
Hanuman, the esteemed minister of the copperyeyed Sugriva observed the prince holding manifold splendid weapons. He rejoiced, grew in size ready to fight, making the necessary prepararions (taking the required position).
Huge Hanuman, endowed with strength and valour looked  like the rising Sun on the peak of mount Mandara. He looked at prince Aksha and his army as well as his vehicles as though he was burning them with the rays emerging from his fiery eyes.
Aksha, with his wonderful quiver and bow, began to rain rapidly a shower of arrows in the battle, on the mountainlike monkeylord just as a cloud rains on a mountain.
Then Hanuman saw prince Aksha, endowed with excessive splendour, power and energy advancing in a fierce manner like a cloud in the battle. Then Hanuman happy (to see the heroic prince) roared like a clap of thunder.
Young Aksha, proud of his valour with eyes bloodshot in anger rushed towards the matchless Hanuman, just as an elephant would approach a huge pitfall covered with grass.
Struck by the arrows released by prince Aksha, Hanuman roared violently like a thundering cloud and leaped into the sky  putting up a fierce appearance, stretching his arms and thighs.
Dodging like the wind  between the arrows and also escaping the arrows Hanuman, who was swift in movement like the mind, was seen exhibiting his terrific valour in the battle while he moved in the sky.
Admiring the young Aksha's appearance, his skill in holding the quiver and spreading the excellent arrows with missiles and facing the war, Hanuman became thoughtful (as to how to kill him).
The strongarmed Hanuman, who was aware of the propriety of actions, wounded in his arms by the warrior prince started roaring and thinking about the next strategy in the combat.
'He (Aksha) is like the radiant, rising Sun with extraordinary might. He is accomplishing great deeds unlike young warriors of his age and is exhibiting a magnificent feat. He knows all means of fighting. I do not feel like cutting him to size. My mind does not allow me to kill this boy.
'He is a great self. His valour is also admirable. He is focused in battle and highly tolerant. There is no doubt that on account of his excellence  even nagas, yakshas and sages offer salutations to him.
'His mental horizon is enhanced by his valour and power. He is standing before me and dares to look into my eyes. Surely his swift movement and valour will shake  even the minds of suras and asuras.
If I ignore him now, he would get the better of me (I have to consider his challenge seriously). His valour in the battle is growing. It is proper to subdue him now. A spreading fire cannot be neglected.
Reflecting on the power of the enemy, the mighty and valiant vanara thought of his own course of action. Hanuman made up his mind to kill the enemy and increased his speed.
Hanuman the brave son of the Windgod hit with his palm and killed the eight horses (yoked to Aksha's chariot) which had great speed were stable and had the capacity to  bear heavy loads while turning round in the sky. (The battle was fought in the air since Hanuman leaped into the air and the demon hero had to resist him there).
Then hit by Hanuman with his palm, the minister of the copperyeyed Sugriva, the huge chariot seat of Aksha was broken, the wooden frame of the yoke was disjointed, horses were  slain and the great chariot fell down from the sky.
Thereupon Hanuman with the prowess that was equal to wind, approaching the sky firmly caught hold of the legs of Aksha flying into the abode of Garuda, the Windgod and the Siddhas.
Hanuman, the foremost of the vanaras who was equal to his father in valour, seized him just as Garuda, the lord of birds, would seize a great serpent. And spinning him round speedily a thousand times and hitting him, dropped him on the earth.
Hit by Hanuman, the ogre's arms, thighs, hips and neck broken, bones rendered to fragments, eyes protruded, joints disjointed, tendons strewn he was thrown down on the earth dripping blood.
When the great vanara dashed Aksha down on to the earth, the king of demons was struck with terror. The great sages who go round the planets, great seers who were observants of vows, yakshas, panagas, suras including Indra all beings collected together and looked at the vanara with awe.
Hanuman, the hero with bloodshot eyes having  slain Aksha, shone resplendent like the son of Indra (Jayanta), and reached the portal, and waited looking like the god of death determined to destroy all beings.  इत्यार्षे वाल्मीकीये श्रीमद्रामायणे आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyseventh sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Thereafter the great demon king, mighty angry at the death of Aksha in the hands of Hanuman, controlled his feeling and ordered Indrajit who was like a godhead.
"You are an expert in wielding astras (missiles) and foremost among the wielders of weapons. You are highly efficient. You have brought grief even to suras and asuras. You are a warrior of proven ability demonstrated in your war against the gods including Indra. By propitiating, (through penance), grandfather Brahma you have acquired many missiles.
"None could face you in war including Indra, Maruts and gods because of your skill and the power of your astras.
"Excepting you there is none who has not experienced fatigue in war in the three worlds. You alone are intelligent in fighting. You are protected by the strength of your arms and power of austerity. You are aware of the proper place and time of action.
"Nothing is impossible for you in war. You do not consider with your wise judgment any action unfit for undertaking. There is none in all the three worlds who is unaware of the strength of your weapons and your power to recall through Mantra the weapon you have discharged.
"The power of your penance, your valour and your ability to discharge astras in war is equal only to mine. I am not bothered about the consequences of war you wage because your victory is certain.
"Your dear young brother Aksha is killed. O scourage of enemies I do not have the faith in them as I have in you.
"O intelligent warrior measure the  strength, power and valour of the monkey and  your own strength carefully. Exercise your own strength and speed accordingly.
"O  warrior of extraordinary merit among the wielders of astras  asses your strength approach the enemy in a manner by which he is subdued without causing further destruction to our army. Carefully measure your own strength and your enemy's  before you start fighting.
"O hero take no large army as it is futile with this monkey endowed with extraordinary vigour. Even a thunderbolt can do nothing. He is like the wind and has no match in speed. He is like the sacrificial fire who cannot be destroyed by weapons.
"I am reluctant to send you to war in the circumstances. But you are the best choice for me. However, certainly this is the duty of a kshatriya who follows the science of polity. Hence I am sending you.
"O subduer of enemies you are capable of handling different kinds of weapons. Therefore, understand that I seek only your ultimate triumph in war.
Hearing the father's words (of exhortation), he, who is never distressed at the prospect of war decided to seek the battle as he was powerful like the son of Daksha, and went round his father with respect.
Having been honoured by his own kith and kin who loved him, Indrajit rushed forth for war with martial vigour.
When the illustrious son of Ravana, the highly Indrajit resplendent with eyes of lotus petals marched ahead he looked like the turbulent ocean on a fullmoon day.
Like Indra, Indrajit ascended the chariot (which had the standard of Indra as it was seized from him as a token of his having conquered Indra) yoked to four sharptoothed tigers. It moved in swiftness vying with Garuda, the king of birds in speed.
Mounted on the chariot, Indrajit, the best in archery and an expert in weaponry went quickly to the place where that great Hanuman was stationed.
The leader of the monkey also became happier on hearing the rumbling (of the chariot) and the twang of Indrajit's bowstring.
Indrajit who was an adept in warfare, picked his highly powerful bow and aimed his sharpedged arrow at Hanuman.
When he sallied forth happily holding a bow full of passion for war, darkness prevailed in all quarters and it became gloomy. Beasts began to howl in various frightful ways.
(To see the combat) the Nagas, Yakshas, seers and Siddhas who move round the heavenly orbits assembled in the sky. The birds collected  in flocks in the sky and screeched loudly and happily.
Hanuman of very high speed enlarged his body and roared, perceiving Indrajit's chariot coming swiftly.
Indrajit on his part sat in his divine chariot holding a wonderful bow and in a lightning speed twanged it.
Then the son of the demon king and Hanuman, both very fast in speed, mighty and powerful, fearless in war and like sura and asura closed in upon each other.
Hanuman of immeasurable strength heaved himself to a huge proprtion and went moving on the path of his father (windgod) rendering useless the extraordinary speed of the arrows of Indrajit, who was great in chariot warfare, and an efficient archer.
Then the heroic Indrajit, slayer of enemy warriors, discharged long arrows that were fixed with find feathers with sharppointed gold tips, bent a little at the tip touching the bow string, as swift as lightning.
Thereupon, hearing the rumbling of the chariot, the sounds of mrudangas, bheris, and patahas drawing towards him, and percieving the loud twang of the bow (of Indrajit) Hanuman sprang up again.
The great tawny monkey moved quickly between spaces of arrows that were aimed at him rendering hosts of Indrajit's targets futile.
Hanuman, son of the Windgod again stood facing the arrows directly stretching his hands and jumped (into the air).
Both the warriors endowed with speed and skill in warfare carried on the fight which captivated the minds of all creatures.
The demon did not find a way to hit Hanuman. Maruti also found no opportunity to hit great Indrajit. Both of them being equal to gods in valour became too much to each other in war. (Both of them moved at meteoric speed making it difficult to aim at the enemy.)
Indrajit's infallible arrows missed Hanuman. Then the great warrior became perplexed and started thinking seriously within himself entering into a reflective mood.
Then Indrajit, son of the demon king, thinking that a vanara should not be killed started considering other means of catching hm.
Then the heroic master of weapons, an excellent and glorious warrior directed the  Brahmastram towards the foremost of monkeys.
Indrajit, the strongarmed hero, who knew the secrets of all missiles, realising that the son of the Windgod cannot be killed caught him by the divine weapon of Brahma (Brahmastram).
Then Hanuman bound by the weapon of the demon was unable to move and fell on the ground.
The monkey leader realised that his speed was arrested by the power of the lord Brahma, by the strength of the bond of Brahmastram. He then recalled lord Brahma's boon to him.
Hanuman realised that it was by invoking creator Brahma and applying the mantra that he was caught by Brahmastram. On that occasion he started thinking of the boon given to him  by Grandsire Brahma :
'I deem it an effect of the power of Brahma. It is not possiblle for me to free myself due to the power of the great lord presiding over the universe through the astra. It should be obeyed'.
Reflecting within himself about the power of the astra, Hanuman recalled Braham's favour to him. He recalled his own power to liberate himself from the Brahmastra and resolved to abide by the order of Brahma.
'Even though I am bound by the astra, I have the protection of both Brahma and Indra as well as the Windgod. Hence there is no cause for apprension.
'If I am caught by the demon I will have the opportunity to see the demon lord. Therefore, let me be caught by my enemies'.
Hanuman, a destroyer of enemies, who assesses before he acts, resolved (to submit to the ordinance of Brahma), to be silent (the power of his movement affected). When the enemy forces came to him slowly and slowly, siezed him forcibly and abused him, he roared.
Then the ogres had Hanuman, the subduer of enemies, who made no effort to move, bound with hemp rope and bark robes.
Bound by the enemy warriors, Hanuman, decided to bear all humiliations, thinking, 'May be the demon king might come to see me out of curiosity if he is so disposed'.
On being bound by bark ropes Hanuman was set free from the bond of Brahmastra, since  the bondage of Brahmastra does not tolerate another ordinary bondage.
Then the heroic Indrajit coming to know that the foremost of the monkeys bound by bark ropes was released from the bondage of Brahmastra, thought, 'indeed the divine weapon does not tolerate other bonds, so the vanara is released'.
Though binding and dragging by the ogres had hurt Hanuman, he on his part did not know that he had been released from Brahmastra.
The cruel ogres hit Hanuman with sticks and fists and dragged him to the presence of the demon lord.
Then Indarjit, seeing the powerful Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys who was released from the Brahmastra, still bound by bark ropes, presented him to the ogres and their master in the royal assembly.
The ogres presented the best of monkeys, Hanuman looking like an elephant in rut to Ravana, the demon king.
"Who is he? Whose son is he? Why has he come here? Where has he come from? What business does he have here?" Thus the heroic demons talked among themselves.
Thereafter other ogres angrily said 'Let us kill him, burn him or otherwise devour him,' thus they spoke to one another.
The great Hanuman moving quickly and crossing the path came near the feet of the king. He saw the aged and experienced ministers of the king and the palace of the king adorned with precious gems.
Resplendent Ravana saw  the ogres of ugly appearance dragging the foremost of the monkeys here and there.
Hanuman the best of monkeys also saw the demon king who had both splendour and strength, radiating brilliance like the Sun.
That tenheaded rakshasa king, rolling his red eyes rapidly in rage and observing the monkey unwinkingly ordered the noble and aged ministers of his clan to interrogate Hanuman.
At the very outset they questioned Hanuman manner in the usual about the place he came from and the purpose. Hanuman reported, 'I am Hanuman. I came as a messenger by the order of the king of monkeys'.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyeigth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The highly courageous Hanuman, astonished at  the  action (of binding and dragging him to the court) by the demon king looked at him with eyes turned red in anger.
(Hanuman looked at Ravana) of innate splendour, who shone with a glittering crown of gold glowing, encircled with strings of pearls.
He was decked with wonderful golden ornaments studded with diamonds and had small motifs of precious gems fixed to them. They were as though designed by imagination. (An ornament made with the hand connot be so fine and delicate.)
He was dressed in exquisite silk and smeared with red sandal paste and had many ornamental designs drawn on his body with fragrant unguents.
He appeared terrible with bloodred eyes, shining sharp big teeth, drooping lips and ten heads, which looked like ten peaks of mountain Mandara inhabited by various beasts. He was heroic, powerful and splendid.
He was like a black mountain of collyrium, and with a face like the fullmoon. With a pearl necklace illumining his chest he appeared like a cloud lit up by the fullmoon with white cranes flying across. (The white pearlnecklace moving on his chest appeared like a row of cranes flying through the black cloud.)
Adorned with armlets (keyura), smeared with choicest sandal paste, his shining, stout armlets appeared like many fivehooded serpents (fingers appearing like hoods).
(He was) seated on a huge magnificent throne of crystal encrusted with precious stones and overspread with a wonderful carpet.
Young and beautiful girls decorated exceedingly well holding whisks all over the vicinity attended on him.
He was attended by Durdhara, Prahasta, Mahaparsva and Nikumbha who were his learned ministers. Seated comfortably and attended by the four arrogant ministers, he was puffed with pride of their strength and appeared like the entire world surrounded by four oceans.
He was attended by ogres including ministers who were intellectuals and adept in counselling. He appeared like lord Indra attended by the gods.
Hanuman saw the highly resplendent giant king (seated on the throne) who appeared like a cloud laden with water appearing on the peak of mount Meru.
Hanuman looked at the demon king with great amazement even while he was dealt harshly by the demons of fierce valour.
Seeing the splendour of the lord of demons, Hanuman was dimayed and started thinking thus:
'Oh what charm what courage what strength what splendour How great is this demonking, an endowment of all merits.
'If only this lord of demons was not unrighteous, he could have become even the lord (protector) of gods including Indra.
'This Ravana has done many cruel, fierce and contemptible deeds. That is why even the demons, gods and all the people of this world get scared of him. He will render the entire world into a single ocean when he turns angry'.
Many such thoughts crossed Hanuman's intelligent mind on seeing Ravana's brilliance and power.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकोनपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyninth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
The mighty armed Ravana, a tormentor of all worlds, overcome with anger beheld the tawnyeyed brilliant lord of monkeys who stood before him and started thinking in his mind full of apprehensions.
'Is he Lord Nandi who came here in person? I was earlier cursed by him when I shook the mount Kailasa in the past. Could he have assumed a monkeyform or may be he is the great demon Bana. (Nandi is the bull, the vehicle of Lord Siva).
The infuriated demon king told the great minister Prahasta, these  profound words in a brief manner appropriate to the hour.
"Enquire from this wicked one, why he has come and from where, Why he destroyed the garden and for what purpose he threatened the demonesses?
"Enquire why this wicked one entered this inviolable city and for what purpose did he wage a war"
On hearing Ravana, Prahasta spoke these words boosting the monkey's morale 'O monkey Be relaxed. Feel safe. You need not entertain any fear.
"Have you came to the abode of Ravana sent by Indra? Speak the truth. Be not afraid.You will be released".
"Your appearance is only of that of a vanara. But your glow is not of a vanara indeed. Tell the truth today. You will be set free.
"If you tell a lie, it will be difficult for you to live. Or else, tell me for what reason have you entered the abode of Ravana.'
The foremost of the vanaras spoke to the lord of ogres in response to the equiries made to him: "I have not come from Indra or Yama or Varuna. I have no friendship with Kubera. I have not been sent by Visnu. By birth I am vanara and I have come here.'
"Desiring to fight with me the powerful ogres came. Then I fought in self defence.
"It is not possible to bind me with any bondage of astras even by devas or danavas. Such a boon has been granted to me by Grandfather Brahma.
"Wishing to see the king I honoured this astra and not otherwise. Even though I was tormented by the ogres and released by the astra I submitted to you as I have a small work assigned by the king.
Know that I am a messenger of the highly powerful Rama. O lord please listen to these beneficial words of mine meant for your welfare.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftieth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hanuman, the best of monkeys, looking at the very powerful Ravana spoke slowly  these highly meaningful words.
"O lord of demons I reached your realm here by the orders of Sugriva, lord of monkeys who is like your brother. He conveys his good wishes to you.
"The great Sugriva who is like your brother sends you a message pertinent to this world and the other world, that which is beneficial and consistent with righteousness and propriety (धर्म and अर्थ). Listen:
"There was an emperor named Dasaratha richly endowed with chariots, horses and elephants. He was a friend to the world and was like a father and equal to Indra in splendour.
"His eldest son, a highly effulgent one, named Rama who was dear to the king, accepting his father's orders went into exile with brother Lakshmana and wife Sita also accepting a righteous path and entered Dandaka forest.
"Sita, daughter of king Janaka of Videha kingdom, loyally followed her husband, Rama. She was lost in the forest.
"Searching for the divine lady the prince reached mount Rshyamuka along with his brother and there he met Sugriva.
"Sugriva promised Rama to undertake search for Sita and Rama assured Sugriva of securing him the kingdom of the monkeys.
"Then prince Rama killed Vali in battle and made Sugriva, king of the vanaras and bears and restored the kingship of Sugriva.
"You know of Vali, chief of the vanaras, in the past. Rama killed him with a single arrow in the combat.
"Sugriva, who is true to his word and a faithful warrior, king of monkeys anxiously sent vanaras in all directions for searching Sita.
"Hundreds, thousands and unlimited number of monkeys are searching (for Sita) in all directions, in the underworld and heavens and the sky.
"Some of the very powerful heroes equal to Garuda, equal to the Windgod (in swiftness) have gone (in quest of Sita) without touching the earth.
"I, Maruta's son, Hanuman by name too came swiftly leaping across a hundred yojanas across the ocean searching for Sita.
"While I was roaming I saw Janaka's daughter Sita at your house.You are a knower of the truth of righteousness. You are very wise and carrried out great austerities. It does not behove you to abduct another man's wife.
"Indeed, respectable people and wise men like you should not indulge in actions opposed to righteousness as it will strike at the very root of your existence.
"Who, even among gods and asuras can withstand the arrows released by Lakshmana in obedience to the infuriated Rama's orders?
"O king  there is none in these three worlds who can enjoy happiness by displeasing Rama.
"Think that my advice is beneficial to you for you present, past and future. It is righteous. It will provide you material wealth too. Hence return Sita to the lord of the people.
"I have actually spotted the divine lady here which was most difficult. Rama will plan the remaining course of action.
"I have seen Sita immersed in deep sorrow. You do not realise that by abducting her you are keeping a fivehooded female serpent in your house.
"Just as food mixed with venom cannot be digested by the great fire (fire of hunger), it is not possible to keep Sita even by gods and demons. (Sita is like food mixed with poison. Ravana cannot digest her with all his power.)
"You have acquired the merit of righteousness by prolonged hardships experienced during your penance. It is not proper to forfeit your own life in this way.
"You know you will not be killed by asuras or gods. In that case also this (keeping Sita with you) may be the prime cause of your death.
"Sugriva is not an demon, nor a danava nor gandharva, nor a yaksha nor even a pannaga. Therefore how can you save your life from Sugriva?
"The fruit of dharma does not accrue to one who has reached the culmination of  adharma. Unrighteousness will destroy  the fruits of righteousness.
"There is no doubt you have earned merit through righteousness (dharma destroys adharma and yields sweet fruit ultimately). But now you will quickly reap the result of your unrighteousness also.
"You know about the killing of all ogres at Janasthana and of Vali also. You know about the alliance of Rama and Sugriva. You may  decide on a proper course of action for the sake of your own welfare.
" Alone, I can destroy this entire Lanka teeming with horses, chariots and elephants. Indeed I have the energy but not the mandate of Sri Rama.
"Rama made a vow in the presence of bears and vanaras that he would exterminate the arrogant enemy troops  by whom Sita is abducted and assaulted.
"Indra, the destroyer of enemy citadels cannot live happily if he offends Rama. What to speak of persons like you?
"Sita who is under your custody is no ordinary lady. She is indeed the dark night of dissolution, destroyer of entire Lanka. Know this.
"Stop holding the noose of death in Sita's form whom you yourself have placed on your shoulders. Think of your own welfare.
"Visualize this city of Lanka including its marketplaces and main streets as  burnt by Sita's power of chastity and  Rama's anger.
"Do not pave the path of your friends, ministers, clan, brothers and sisters, sons, wellwishers, wives and luxuries and Lanka to destruction.
"O king of demon listen to the words of truth of the servant of Rama, his messenger and specially a vanara.
"Illustrious Rama can put an end  to and dissolve all creatures including both movable and immovables of all worlds. He can recreate all of them in the same way. He has such superhuman powers.
"He is equal to Visnu in valour. There is none who can dare face his rage, be it among gods, asuras, yakshas, rakshasas, vidyadharas, gandharvas uragas, siddhas, kings of kinnaras, birds and all beings at all places and at all times.
"Rama is the supreme lord of all worlds, a lion among kings. Having pained him it is very difficult for you to sustain your life after offending him to this extent.
"O king of demons, even devas, daityas, gandharvas, vidyadharas, nagas, and yakshas are incompetent to face Rama the lord of the three worlds in wars.
"Even the selfborn, fourfaced Brahma, the threeeyed Siva who destroyed Tripura, Mahendra, the king of suras do not have the power to save one whom Rama decides to kill".
The tenheaded Ravana who was of matchless strength, hearing the unpleasant words of advice and warning expressed skilfully with dignity by the great Hanuman, enraged Ravana, his eyes rolling in anger ordered the execution of Hanuman.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfirst sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hearing the great vanara's speech, Ravana overwhelmed with anger ordered the execution of Hanuman.
Vibhishana did not approve of the killing of Hanuman, who had declared that he was an envoy (of Sri Rama) when the wicked Ravana ordered his murder.
Vibhishana who stood by the right course of action, having realised that the lord of demons was angry pondered over his duty.
Then Vibhishana, who was skilled in speech having decided about his duty   addressed his reverential elder brother, a conqueror of enemies in soothing, words in a meaningful, wholesome manner.
"O king of ogres give up your wrath, forgive and calm down. Please listen to my appeal. You know the basic values of life. Virtuous rulers of the earth do not order killing of an envoy.
"Mighty king killing this Hanuman is contrary to righteousness of kings. This is deplorable diplomacy and also unbecoming of you.
"You are conversant with  dharma of a king.  You have a sense of gratitude. You are a knower of right and wrong of all beings. the supeme truth.
"If wise persons like you are also overpowered by unjust anger, then the mastery of  the scriptures will become a mere fruitless exercise.
"O destroyer of foes, O unassailable king of demon calm down. Only after carefully considering what is proper and improper decide on the punishment to be imposed".
Ravana, the lord of demons heard Vibhishana's words and overcome with anger replied:
"O slayer of foes it is not wrong to kill a sinner. I shall, therefore, kill the sinful vanara."
On hearing his brother's harsh words spoken in tremendous anger, which were not acceptable to noble souls, wise Vibhishana again spoke these words of supreme truth:
"O lord of Lanka O king of demons be pleased to listen to my words which are the essence of dharma and artha. The elders have declared that the emissaries should not be killed by any means.
This enemy has done a lot of harm, no doubt. Indeed he has done terrible and unpleasant deeds. (Yet) the wise have recommended many alternate punishments, while prohibiting their killing.
"Mutilation of limbs, flogging, shaving of the head, and deforming limbs etc. these punishments have been prescribed for an emissary. Never has killing of an emissary been heard.
"You are wellversed  in  dharma and artha. Learned men first decide what is right or wrong (before imposing punishment). How are you swayed by unjust anger? Indeed courageous persons (like you) should control anger.
"Heroic Ravana there is hardly any one who is equal to you in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice of worldly affairs and in grasping subtle truths of sastras. Indeed you are supreme among suras and asuras.
"You are the king of demons. Hosts of gods and daityas efficient in wars are conquered by you again and again since you are a brave warrior invincible to gods and demons.
"I do not see any use in killing this monkey. Pronounce  punishment on those who have sent this vanara.
"Whether he is soft or harsh, he has been sent by others. He is speaking on other's behalf and is dependent on them. An emissary does not deserve to be killed.
"O king If he is killed, I do not see any one who can cross this great ocean and come by air to reach this place.
"You who can conquer citadels of enemies should not direct your efforts to kill an envoy.You are fit to make efforts against enemies like gods including Indra.
"O lover of war if Hanuman is slain I do not see any one who can incite those two illmannered sons of the king who are prevented from reaching this faroff land.
"O delighter of demons even the gods and demons who are endowed with valour and energy cannot win you. You are invincible. It is not proper for you to lose chances of a good war.
"You have with you wellwishers, courageous ones, who have good qualities born in a good race, who are noble, sensible people, wielders of weapons and wellpaid warriors in crores.
By your order let some strong soldiers from one contingency go and capture the two sons of the king, to exhibit your power over the enemy.
The tenheaded Ravana heard his brother, the greatsoul Vibhishana's timely advice which was in keeping with the laws of the land and replied.
"Indeed, you have spoken very well.Killing of emissary is censured (in sastras). Surely we will impose suitable punishment other than killing.
"The tail is dear to the monkeys and it is an ornament for them. Set fire to it at once and let him go with his burning tail.
"Then all his friends, relatives and his kinsmen will see his disfigured and handicapped form. The demon king having ordered thus, the monkey was taken by the ogres round the junctions of the roads all over the city with his tail on fire.
"Obeying the orders of the king, the brutally angry demons wrapped his tail with tatters of cotton.
While the tail was being swathed, the great vanara grew in size like wild fire fed with dry firewood.
The demons soaked the tail and set fire to it. His face burning in anger shone like the rising Sun and his mind seized with indignation, he struck them with the burning tail.
All the demons including the shedemons and their children and the elders went out joyfully to see the burning tail of Hanuman.
When the cruel demons collected together and bound him once again the heroic Hanuman thought what was appropriate to the moment.
'Even though these ogres are not capable, they have bound me. Indeed I will leap (into  the air) once again and sever my bonds and kill them.
'These  evilminded demons bind me, ordered by their lord. When I am moving here for the welfare of  my master, I will not let them escape৷৷
'I am strong enough to destroy all the demons in a battle. I am enduring this humiliation in order to make Rama happy. In this way I will get a chance to see Lanka once again.
'Indeed I saw Lanka at night for which I could not acquire proper knowledge about the fortification of the city. Surely it should be seen by me now after the night has passed.
'Let the demons torture me freely by setting fire to my tail. Let them bind me. I am not exhausted.
Then the ogres set forth joyfully capturing the very powerful elephant among the monkeys, the great vanara who had contracted his body.
The cruel demons started blowing conches and beating drums. They paraded him in the city  announcing their deeds.
Hanuman, the subduer of enemies ranged forth happily while he was followed by the demons in the great city.
The great vanara saw wonderful, towering mansions, secure, mammoth buildings all over and welllaid out squares on the streets.
The son of the Windgod saw the streets with beautiful, tall mansions and houses appearing like clouds, highways and byways and secret routes.
All the demons went forth through cross roads, altars built on four pillars and royal roads announcing that he (Hanuman) was a spy.
With eagerness to have a glance at Hanuman's blazing tail, women, children and the aged here and there came out of eagerness to see him.
When the tip of Hanuman's tail was set on fire, the uglyeyed shedemon. Carried the unpleasant news to divine Sita.
"O Sita the redfaced monkey who conversed with you is being paraded in the streets with his tail set on fire".
Distressed on hearing the news which was as cruel as her own abduction Sita started burning with grief and invoked the firegod.
Wishing the great monkey well, the largeeyed Sita invoked the Firegod in her heart.
"O Firegod if I have served my husband, if I have practised austerities, and if I am loyal to my husband, be cool to Hanuman.
"If wise Rama has some compassion for me, if there is any residue of good luck for me, to Hanuman be cool O Firegod.
"O Firegod if Rama is righteous, if I am pure in mind, and if I am longing to unite with him, be cool to Hanuman.
"If Sugriva is true to his promise to fight (for me), if he should be able to rescue me from this ocean of agony let Hanuman be cool (not consumed by fire.)"
Then the tips of the intense flame appeared steadily moving to the fawneyed Sita indicating the firegod's auspiciousness and safety to Hanuman.
"The Windgod accompanying Hanuman's firelit tail also blew cool like the wind from snow, to calm the mind of the divine lady.
When the tail was burning, the vanara wondered how the fire ablaze on every side was not burning him:
'This huge flame is not hurting me. It  is as though a mass of ice is placed at the end of my tail. (The fire did not torture nor extend beyond the tip of my tail.)
'It must be due to the power of Rama, by which I found a wonderful mountain  emerging from the sea to give me protection while I was crossing the ocean. Now evidently this is due to Rama's power (that my tail is not burning me).
'If the anxiety of the ocean and the wise Mainaka mountain is to serve Rama what is it that the fire cannot do?
'Because of Sita's steadfast loyalty, Rama's power and my father's friendship with the Firegod, the fire is not burning me.'
Once more a thought came to the great Hanuman,the elephant among monkeys. He sprang up and shouted loud.
Then the illustrious Hanuman reached the entrance of the lofty city, which was  like the peak of a mountain and turned away the demons.
From his mountainlike form he assumed his original small figure within a moment casting off the bonds.
Illustrious Hanuman was relieved of the bond and once again grew to a mountain size. Looking around he saw an iron club near the archway.
Seizing the black Iron club again, the strongarmed Hanuman killed all the demon guards.
Hanuman, who was of fearsome valour in war with the demons, having killed them, gazed at Lanka once again. Garlanded by the flames of his tail around, he shone like the Sun covered with garlands of rays. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रिपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftythird sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
With his objectives achieved, the monkey gazed at Lanka with growing zeal and pondered over the remaining work.
'Is there anything still left which can further torment the demons here?
'If the citadel is destroyed it would be a happy conclusion with a little effort. I can successfully complete my task.
'It would be proper to satiate this fire at the end of my tail  by offering it to these excellent mansions (I shall set fire to these houses).
The great Hanuman, with his burning tail wandered on tops of the mansions of Lanka, which looked like clouds with lightning.
The vanara moved from one house to the other, looking at the gardens and houses of the demons without fear.
Powerful and brave Hanuman who was equal to the Windgod in speed jumped down on the house of Prahasta and set fire to it. From there he jumped on to Mahaparsva's house and set it ablaze. Hanuman appeared like the fireflame at the time of dissolution.
The great, brilliant vanara bounded on to Vajradamstra's, of Suka's and wise Sarana's.
Thus Hanuman, the chief of the vanaras set fire to Indrajit's residence and then to Jambumali's and Sumali's building.
The brilliant monkey leader bypassed Vibhishanas's house and avoiding it that way set fire to the mansions of other ogres, Rasmiketu, Suryasatru, Hrasvakarna, Vajradamshtra, Romasa, Yuddhonmatta, Matta, Dhwajagriva, Vidyujjihva, Hastimukha, Karala, Pisacha, Sonitaksha, Kumbhakarna, Makaraksha, Yagnasatru, Brahmasatru, Naranthaka, Kumbha, and wicked Nikumbha.
Moving among those highly luxurious mansions the glorious Vanara burnt away the wealth of all the rich demons.
Heroic and illustrious Hanuman, having crossed all the residences of the ogres finally reached the palace of Ravana, the king.
Then Hanuman, the hero with the burning tail set fire to the chief palace of Ravana that resembled mountains Meru and Mandara, decorated with different kinds of gems and exquisite with several auspicious articles. While the flames were rising up, he roared like the thundering cloud at the time of dissolution.
The windgod's association made the fire spread at great speed. It appeared like fire at the time of dissolution.
Combined with the wind the fire began to spread, burning the houses with great speed.
The palatial structures with windows of golden meshwork, embedded with pearls and gems and other precious stones tumbled.
Unable to protect their rich houses, and thoroughly disappointed the demons said, 'Alas, the Firegod came in the form of a vanara' A tumultuous sound arose.
A few shedemons at once jumped out of their burning mansions surrounded by fire. They held their breastfeeding babies in their arms, their hair let loose shouting as they jumped. As they were alighting, they glowed like lightnings dropping from the clouds.
Hanuman saw many colourful molten minerals mixed with diamonds, corals vaiduryas, pearls and silver flowing (dropping) from every mansion.
Just as fire is not satisfied with dry sticks and grass Hanuman was not satisfied with the dead demons.
The flames of fire were shining like kimsuka flowers here, like salmali wood there, and like saffron flowers elsewhere.
Hanuman, endowed with great speed, burnt Lanka just as Tripurari, or Rudra burnt theTripuras (three cities of gold, silver and iron).
The fierce fire lit by Hanuman, the hero endowed with great speed, spread around in circles and shot up flying high to the top of the Trikuta mountain on which Lanka was located.
Fanned by the wind, inflamed by the fat from the corpses of the demons, the fire spread in the mansions burning without smoke. It spread with great speed like the fire at the end of the universe.
The highly radiant fire stood like a crore of Suns surrounding the entire Lanka. It was glowing, cracking like Indra's thunderbolt as though the whole universe was collapsing.
The dazzling flames of fire red like kimsuka flowers shot up violently into the sky. The clouds engulfed by the smoke rising from the subsiding fire was shining like the lustre of blue lotuses .
'Is this the wielder of thunderbolt Indra, who is the king of gods? Is it Yama himself? Is It the Windgod, or Firegod, or Varuna or Rudra? Is it Kubera or Sun or Moon or is it the god of death himself? He cannot be a mere monkey, indeed.
'Or is it Grandfather Brahma, the supreme fourfaced god enraged and arrived in the form of vanara to kill the clan of demons?
'Can he be the vast boundless energy, the unthinkable and infinite lord Visnu assuming the monkeyform? Is he the peerless, unmanifest form beyond all imagination who has arrived here by virtue of his Maya (illusory power) in order to destroy the demons'?
All eminent demons having collected together, quickly surveyed the situation.Seeing the burnt city, with  all its living creatures, houses and trees consigned to the flames, they spoke to one another.
Lanka with its chariots horses, elephants, flocks of birds, animals and trees burnt all of a sudden, the ogres cried loudly and piteously.
"O father dear O son O my dear O friend alas, the life which is enjoyable, sacred and prosperous is destroyed in this way". Saying this, the demons cried out dreadfully and loudly.
With the Fire god spreading flames all over, heroes dead, retreating troops shattered by Hanuman's anger, Lanka appeared as though it was cursed.
Highly sensitive Hanuman saw the city of Lanka filled with perplexed, scared and sorrowful demons, Lanka succumbed to the flames of firegod and looked as if it was  hit by the anger of Brahma, the selfborn god.
Hanuman, son of the Windgod stood at ease having shattered the garden that was full of excellent trees, and killed the demons and burnt down rows of beautiful houses in the city.
Standing on the peak of Trikuta mountain with his tail burning like the aura of the Sun, the lion among vanaras looked resplendent like the Sun surrounded by his rays.
Great Hanuman, sought Rama's presence in his mind after killing many demons, breaking down many trees of the garden, and setting fire to the mansions of demons.
All the gods praised the vanara chief, son of the Windgod, who was powerful, wise and efficient and had the speed of the Wind.
Hanuman destroyed the garden, killed the demons, burnt the city of Lanka and was shining with delight
The gandharvas, gods, siddhas and great sages were amazed at seeing the burning city of Lanka৷৷
All beings were afraid of Hanuman thinking that he was the fatal fire, consuming worlds at the hour of dissolution .
All gods, great sages, gandharvas, vidyadharas, nagas and yakshas and all great beings experienced supreme joy.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुःपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfourth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Powerful Hanuman, having burnt the entire city of Lanka, put out the fire on his tail in the ocean. Beholding the burning city, the destroyed gardens and the panic stricken ogres, he began to think:
Overtaken by great fear, Hanuman felt a sense of selfreproach seeing Lanka reduced to ashes, and said, ' Lanka is burnt. What a heinous action has been perpetrated by me'.
'Blessed indeed are the highsouled men, who in their wisdom restrain their own anger as one would put off  burning fire with water.
'Which sinful act an angry man will not commit? He will even kill his respectable elders or insult sages with his harsh tongue.
'Fie upon me, a wicked, shameless person and the greatest sinner for betraying the  master and setting fire to the city without thinking of Sita.
'If this Lanka is burnt, even noble Janaki is burnt, my master's work is spoilt by me unknowingly.
'My very mission is foiled. Sita has not been protected by me for no part of Lanka has escaped unburnt.
'Surely Janaki has perished in Lanka, for not even a little place is left unburnt. The entire city is reduced to ashes.
'If my work has been destroyed by my perversity of judgement, I will give up my life now  and here itself'.
'Shall I end my life by jumping into fire just now, or else into the mouth of submarine fire? Should I offer my body to the living creatures of the ocean as their food?
'Having spoilt the entire work how can I show my face to the king of monkeys? How is it possible to see both the tigers among men?
'On account of my mistake of yielding to anger, I have exhibited the unstable monkeynature and made it well established in the three worlds.
'Fie upon my hasty action commited due to lack of selfcontrol. I did not save Sita eventhough the entire situation was under my control. (I had the  capacity to save her. But I failed due to anger.)
'If the two princes know about Sita's loss they will die and when they are dead Sugriva would perish along with all his relatives.
'How will the loving righteous brother, Bharata along with Satrughna survive after hearing this?
'When the righteous Ikshvaku race perishes the people would be tormented by grief and remorse. There is no doubt.
'I have failed in seeking dharma and artha. It is evident is that I am a destroyer of the world because I was overtaken by anger. How unfortunate I am'
When Hanuman was thus bemoaning, good omens as in the past appeared before him. He started reflecting once again:
'On the other hand a beautiful and auspicious lady like Sita will be protected by her own splendour and will not perish as fire cannot extinguish fire. (Sita is pure like fire. Here the great sage Valmiki is suggesting the future incident in which Sita emerged safe from 'Agnipariksha' or fireordeal.)
'Fire cannot touch that lady who is protected by her own chastity and who is wedded to the righteous man of immasureable glory.
'Fire, the consumer of oblations who has the property of burning has not burnt me and this is surely on account of Rama's power and Vaidehi's merits.
'To Bharata, Lakshmana and Satrughna she is a goddess and she is dear to Rama's heart, how would she perish?
'If not so, the firegod who never fails in burning has not burnt my tail. How will he burn noble Sita?'
Then Hanuman thought of the appearance of mountain Hiranyanabha in the midst of water, a wonderful phenomenon.
'By virtue of her power of asceticism, power of truthfulness and exclusive devotion towards her husband, she may consume the fire. Fire will not burn her'.
As Hanuman was thinking so, he heard the words of the great charanas who were praising the queen's power of righteousness.
'Oh Hanuman has indeed accomplished the marvellous task of spreading the terrific fire on the demons buildings.
The city is crowded with women, children and old demons running (in a bid to save themselves). The loud wails of demons resounded in the mountaincaves. It was as if the city was shrieking loudly.
'The city with its towering markets, ramparts and portals is burnt, but Janaki is not. It is really wonderful, strange
With omens that proved to be right and for good reasons and from the words of the sages (charanas), Hanuman felt happy.
Hanuman, having fulfilled his desires and knowing that Sita is not hurt, thought of departing after meeting Sita once again (to testify that she is really safe).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfifth sarga of Sundarakanda  of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Then Hanuman offered salutations to Janaki, stationed at the foot of the simsupa tree, and said, "Luckily I see you unscathed."
Looking at Hanuman again and again, as he was ready to start on his return journey, thus spoke Sita expressing her love for her husband:
"O destroyer of foes, you are capable of rescuing me singlehanded. Your success will  raise your strength and bring glory.
"If Kakutstha Rama, the slayer of enemy forces comes to Lanka, fills it with his arrows and takes me back, it will be worthy of him.
"You should act in such a manner that the exalted Rama, who is chivalrous in the battlefield, exhibits his valour worthy of his stature".
Hearing her meaningful reply which was welldisposed and reasonable, Hanuman replied:
"Rama will come soon with the best of vanaras and bears. He would win the battle and remove your sorrrow.
Hanuman, son of the Windgod having consoled Vaidehi, saluted her respectfully and decided to depart.
Then Hanuman, the crusher of enemies, a tiger among vanaras anxious to see his lord ascended the mount Arishta.
Mount Arishta was full of blue forestranges with choicest tall padmaka trees. With clouds hanging on the slopes of mountain peaks, it appeared as though the mountain was wrapped in an upper garment.
As if the mountain was awakened from sleep by the rays of the blessed Sun. With the colour of glowing minerals exuding, it was as if the mountain was looking out with his eyes open. (The minerals underneath the mud appear when wind blows removing the dust covering them. The glowing minerals are fancied to be eyes of the mountain.)
With the loud sounds of masses of gurgling waters, the mountain appeared as though it was standing and reciting (the Vedas) loudly. With murmuring sounds of different waterfalls, it appeared as though the mountain was singing. (The sage differentiates the steadily trickling watersound from the rhythmic musical sounds of waterfalls.)
With the tall devadaru trees on the mountain, it appeared as if the sages were standing with shoulders lifted up and performing penance. The sounds of waterfalls filled all over with reverberations.
The mountain appeared as if trembling with the dark clouds of autumn. The shrill sounds pasing through the hollow bamboos filled with air appeared as if it was producing sweet musical notes.
The mountain was as though hissing like a dreadful, poisonous snake. With the caves standing majestically covered with mist, the mountain appeared as if it was meditating.
With the ranges of foothills appearing like the feet of clouds traversing, with its peaks like garlands of clouds traversing over the mountain, it made one feel it was yawning.
With many kinds of caves and peaks scattered all over, the mountain looked delightful. It was canopied with numerous trees like Sal, palms, Aswakarnas and bamboos.
It was spread with creepers filled with beautiful flowers and herds of animals. The colourful minerals flowing down decorated the mountain.
There were many streams of water flowing and rocks making it difficult for the streams to flow. The mountain was inhabited by sages, yakshas, gandharvas, kinnaras and nagas, and uragas.
The clusters of creepers, and trees bearing tasty fruits and roots were uprooted. There were caves inhabited by lions. Herds of tigers were scattered all over (by the impetus of Hanuman's pressure on the mountain).
Anxious to see Rama soon, the son of the Windgod ascended the mountain happily.
Crushed under Hanuman's feet the rocks making a loud noise on the beautiful mountain ranges rolled down, reduced to powder.
On ascending the king of mountains, desiring to reach the northern shore of the saltwater ocean from the Southern shore, he enlarged his body (in preparation to leap).
Then the heroic son of the Windgod, who had ascended the mountain saw the dreadful ocean inhabited by fishes and snakes.
Hanuman, the tiger among monkeys leaped into the sky like the Windgod from the south to the north shore.
Pressed under the feet of Hanuman, the great mountain made loud sound sinking into the earth along with all its creatures, with its shaken mountain peaks and uprooted trees dropping down.
Shaken by the violent force of Hanuman's thighs, the blossoming trees fell on the ground like sickmen hit by Indra's thunderbolt.
The dreadful roar of strong lions, lying in mountaincaves was heard cracking the sky when they were crushed in the turmoil.
The Vidyadharis with their clothes slipped and ornaments disarrayed in fear, at once flew from the mountain.
Highly powerful, huge and poisonous snakes with their glowing tongues protruded, pressed on their heads and necks (by Hanuman).
Then the kinnaras, uragas, gandhravas, yakshas and vidyadharas left the tortured mountain and occupied the sky.
Crushed by the powerful Hanuman, that prosperous mountain with its trees standing and tall peaks sank into the underworld.
That mountain of ten yojanas in width and thirty yojanas in height got levelled with the earth.
Eager to leap the terrific ocean lashed by huge waves hitting the shore Hanuman rose up effortlessly and jumped into the sky.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षट्पञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the  fiftysixth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hanuman leaped ike the Windgod, unwearied across the sky, as a huge boat crosses an ocean. The ocean was graced with a swan, the sky with constellation of Swati with fullblown lotuses and water lilies, like the nagas, yakshas, and gandharvas gathered together. The Moon in the sky was like a white lotus, the Sun like a waterfowl, the auspicious Tishya and Shravana like the sweetvoiced swans, and the clouds like duckweeds and green grassy spots on the shore. The Punarvasu star was like a large fish and the planet Mars was like a crocodile. Airavata was like the great island. The waves produced by the wind were like cool moonlight in the cold water.
Great Hanuman, son of the Windgod, flew through the abode of the Windgod as if he was swallowing the space, scratching the  Moon, lord of the stars, as if seizing the heavens along with the constellation of Sun and stars and as though he was drawing the clusters of clouds.
(In contact with Hanuman) the clouds shone forth brilliantly in white and black, in blue and yellow and in greenish red colour.
With his exist and entrances into the mass of clouds, his appearances and disappearances among the clouds, he looked like the Moon.
Passing through the clouds, appearing and disappearing, the heroic Hanuman clad in white was like the Moon in the white sky.
As he made his way through flakes of clouds, again and again appearing and disappearing, Hanuman the delight of the Windgod shone in the sky roaring like a thundering cloud. He looked like Garuda.
The glorious Hanuman, having killed eminent ogres and thereby making himself widely known, having caused havoc to the city of Lanka and  terrific sorrow to Ravana by tormenting the army, offered salutations to Vaidehi from midocean and continued his journey.
The valiant Hanuman touched the lord of mountains fondly and went with great speed just as an arrow released from the centre of a powerful bowstring.
The chief of the monkeys arrived near, and beholding the face of the Mahendra mountain, which resembled a mass of clouds, thundered.
The thundering noise of Hanuman filled all the ten directions with great sound.
Having sighted the place of his companions and waiting to see them for long that tiger among monkeys made a loud noise and shook his tail in joy.
By the terrific sounds made by Hanuman in joy, it seemed as though the pathway of Garuda, the sky along with the Sun's orbit was splitting.
Thereafter the brave and powerful monkeys waiting on the northern shore of the ocean for the arrival of the son of the Windgod, heard the roar and thundering sound of the stormy cloud produced by the sweeping motion of Hanuman's thighs propelled by the speed of his movement.
All the vanaras who were feeling dejected and waiting anxiously heard the noise of Hanuman that sounded like a thundering cloud.
On hearing the loud voice of Hanuman, all the vanaras were longing to see their friend.
Jambavan the chief of vanaras became very happy at heart and called all the vanaras and spoke:
"Oh Hanuman is always successful. If he has not, he would not make sounds in this manner".
Hearing the sound of his dashing movements of arms and thighs the vanaras jumped about in joy, then and there.
The vanaras were very happy. Longing to see Hanuman, they jumped from one tree top to another and from one peak of a mountain to the other.
Waiting for Hanuman, the vanaras jumped from the tree tops holding the branches. They shook the branches just like clothes to welcome friends.
Hanuman, the powerful son of the Windgod roared like the wind captured in a mountain cave would.
(On seeing) Hanuman, who was resembling a heavy cloud approaching, the vanaras stood with folded hands.
Thereafter the vanara, who resembled a mountain, descended with great speed on the summit of mount Mahendra full of trees.
Overwhelmed with immeasurable joy, Hanuman descended from the sky like the mountain with its wings cut off and dropped on the bank of a mountain stream.
Feeling very happy at heart all the vanara leaders gathered around Hanuman. They  stood motionless with extreme happiness.
The vanaras were filled with joy seeing Hanuman who returned unhurt. They offered roots and fruits to him. Hanuman on his part offered salutations to the foremost of the monkeys.
The great Hanuman also offered salutations to elders, preceptors such as Jambavan and other leaders. He also saluted the young Angada.
The valiant Hanuman worthy of worship having been honoured by both Jambavan and Angada was pleased. He responded briefly, saying 'Saw Sita'.
Then holding the hand of Vali's son he sat down at a beautiful location of the garden of mountain Mahendra.
Hanuman felt happy and told Angada, the bull of vanaras, "I saw Sita in the groves of Ashoka guarded by dreadful ogres. She is blameless, eager to see Rama. She is wearing a single braid of hair. She is young and emaciated due to fasting. Her hair is matted and soiled".
Then hearing Hanuman's meaningful and nectarlike words all the vanaras rejoiced.
Some powerful vanaras howled, some chattered, some roared and some screamed, going round and round and others echoed the sounds.
Some elephantlike vanaras who were excited and felt overjoyed lifted their long and beautiful tails and hit them on the ground.
A few vanaras jumped down from the mountain top and hugged the elephantlike Hanuman.
And hearing Hanuman's sweetest words, Angada addressed the heroic vanaras
"O vanara you have leaped such a wide ocean and have returned. In strength and valour. There is none equal to you.
"O your devotion to the king, O your valour, fortitude  and courage is admirable. You could see Rama's wife, an illustrious lady. This is a matter of our good luck. Rama will (now) shed the sorrow due to separation from Sita.
Then the vanaras went round all the three Angada, Hanuman and Jambavan. Out of joy they lay down on the huge rocks.
All the vanaras longing to listen to Hanuman about his crossing the ocean, seeing Lanka, Sita and Ravana kept looking at the face of Hanuman.
Surrounded by many great vanaras, Angada was shining like Indra, lord of the gods attended by the gods in heaven.
The mountain peak graced by famous Hanuman and renowned Angada bedecked with armlets seated on top joyfully, appeared prosperous and splendid.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyseventh sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Then the mighty Hanuman and other vanaras having assembled on the summit of mountain Mahendra and felt vey much happy.
Thereafter, very delighted Jambavan inquired Hanuman most affectionately of all that happened.
"How did you find the godlike lady? How was she? How was the tenheaded one, cruel in action, behaving with her? You may narrate what she said.
"O Hanuman, tell us in detail  the entire thing. On hearing it, we will think about the next course of action.
"You are wise and you should tell us in detail what is to be told and what has to be hidden when we report."
Having been asked (by Jambavan and others) Hanuman with horripilations all over his body, bowed down and saluted in the direction of queen Sita and began:
"I rose upwards leaping into the sky, intent on reaching the southern shore from the mountain Mahendra.It has been witnessed directly by all of you.
"Even as I was leaping I saw a terrific and wonderful golden peak which came as if to obstruct me on my path.
"The mountain stood on my way turning towards me in order to obstruct me. Then I resolved in my mind that this great, wonderful, golden mountain has to be smashed.
"Hit by my tail the great mountain peak, which was radiating like the Sun was shattered into a thousand pieces.
"Perceiving that I am going to smash him he spoke to me in a sweet tone delighting my heart, addressing me like a son.
'Know me to be a friend of windgod and so I am like your father's brother. I am dwelling in this great ocean and known as Mainaka.
'O son in the past, foremost of the mountains too had wings and they used to range  at will all over the earth tormenting all.
'Mahendra, the killer of ogre Paka, heard the story (of the cruel deeds) of mountains and cut off their wings into a thousand pieces with his thunderbolt.
'O son I was saved from Indra by your kind father Maruta who dropped me in this great  ocean.
'O subduer of enemiesI must make efforts to help Rama the foremost among the righteous, for I have received help (from your father) who is equal to Indra in valour'.
"When I heard Mainaka, I told him about my intention to go up. That great self Mainaka allowed me.
"Then the huge mountain in human form concealed as huge mountains remain hidden in the ocean.
"Then with great speed I proceeded on my path. It took a long time to cross the ocean.
"I saw Surasa, the mother of serpents in the midst of the ocean and she said:
'O powerful monkey you are destined to be my food provided by the immortals. Therefore, I will eat you as I have I found you after a long time. (of unsatiated hunger).'
"When addressed thus by Surasa, I bowed low with joined palms, stood before her with my face turned pale, and said:
'Dasaratha's son, the illustrious Rama, a scorcher of enemies, accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and wife Sita entered Dandaka forest.
'His wife was abducted by the evilminded Ravana. By Rama's command I am going to meet her as messenger from Rama.'
"I told her that it is proper for her (living in the domain of Rama) to help his queen and wife. Or else, I promised after I disclose to Rama, Sita's whereabouts, I will come and enter her mouth.
"When Surasa said this I who was ten yojanas in height increased  by fifteen yojanas.
"She too opened her mouth wide enough for my size. Seeing her distending her mouth, in a moment I became small equal to the size of thumb and came out.
"Then Surasa assumed her natural form again in a moment and said this to me:
'O noble vanara O foremost of the vanaras go and accomplish the task.Unite the great Rama with Vaidehi.O strongarmed vanara, be happy. I am pleased with you'.
"Then all creatures praised me saying 'well done well done'. Then I leaped into the vast sky like Garuda.
"Then I was captured by a shadow of some one. I could not see and I reduced my speed and looked around in all the ten directions. I could not see the one who seized me.
"Thinking so I looked down into the water and there I saw a terrific shedemon.
"She was frightening and  laughed in loud voice without any hesitation. Steadfast she uttered these ominous words to me:
'O huge monkey where are you going? I am hungry since long. I am going without food and must eat you. Make me satisfied'.
"I said 'well' and enlarged my body more than her mouth could hold.
"She opened her huge mouth to eat me as she did not know that I had already assumed a huge ugly form on my own.
"In a moment I reduced from a huge form to a small one, entered her heart and sprang into the sky.
"She who resembled a mountain fell into the ocean with her arms hanging down when I pulled out her heart.
"I heard the charanas and siddhas residing in the sky talking to each other that the fierce ogres Simhika has been killed by Hanuman in a moment.
"Having slained Simhika, I thought of the huge feat that I have done. I remembered the big mission before me and went to the southern shore of the ocean and saw Lanka full of trees.
"Then the frightening form, with its hair burning like sacrificial fire, emerged to kill me. I defeated her hittting with my left fist and entered the city at sunset time.
'O hero I am the presiding deity of Lanka whom you have won by your valour. Therefore you will win many demons she foretold.
"There when I went to the harem of Ravana and searched all night, I did not find the fairwaisted Janaka's daughter.
"Not able to find Sita at the residence of Ravana I was immersed in an ocean of endless sorrow and did not know what to do.
"While worrying like that I saw a long golden boundary wall surrounding a splendid home garden. (upabana)
"I crossed that boundary wall and saw many kinds of trees and in the midst of that Ashoka garden, a huge Simsupa tree. I ascended it and saw rows of banana plants.
"Not far from the Simsupa tree I saw beautiful Sita, of dark complexion, with eyes like lotus petals, whose face was emaciated due to fasting, wearing only a single sari (the same one since her abduction) her locks filled with dust, pathetic looking,  immersed in sorrow, meditating on her husband seated like a doe encircled by tigresses, surrounded by ugly and cruel shedemons fed on flesh and blood.
"I remained there looking on that renowned wife of Rama from the Simsupa tree.
"Then I heard a deep sound mixed with jingling golden girdles and anklets coming from Ravana's residence.
"I was scared and contracted my body size and stood on the Simsupa tree like a bird in the sky.
"Then arrived the powerful Ravana with his consorts to that place where Sita was and stood there.
"On seeing Ravana, the king of demons, beautiful Sita, full of fear hid her face and plump breasts between her thighs.
"Sita was full of fear and worry, looked here and there without any protector to pacify. She was trembling in fear. To that Sita, the tenheaded Ravana bent his head down and said, 'trust me and respect me'.
'O Sita if in your pride, you do not respect me, I will see (drink) your blood in two months.
"Hearing the words of evilminded Ravana, Sita became very angry and spoke these approprate words:
'O lowly demon I am the wife of valiant Rama and daughterinlaw of Dasaratha, the king of Ikshvaku race. How is it your tongue that spoke unspeakable words has not fallen down?
'O ignoble one when my husband was away, you came and abducted me unseen by the great Rama. You do not have even a little courage (to win me through a straight fight).
'You are not equal to Rama and not even fit to be his servant. He does yagnas and always abides in truth. He is valiant in war.
"Thus addressed harshly by Janaki, the tenheaded Ravana blazed up in anger suddenly like the flame of the funeral pyre.
"Then the wicked Ravana raised his eyebrows and his right fist to strike at Sita and even the shedemon there raised their voice saying, ' alas, alas '
"Evilminded Ravana's wife Mandodari, a noble one among women came forward from the midst and prevented him.
"She spoke sweetly to Ravana, who was tormented by the god of love saying, 'For what purpose do you desire Sita? You are equal to Mahendra in might'.
'O lord you enjoy with the daughters of gods, gandharvas and even the young ladies of yakshas. Why do you need Sita?'
"Then all the women got together and stopped the mighty nightranger, Ravana and quickly took him back to his mansion.
"Janaki did not care for their words of threat, as though they were a blade of grass and of no use to her.
"Since the threatenings of the shedemons were of no use the ogresses who live on flesh and blood reported to Ravana about great Sita's formidable determination.
"Then all of them gave up hope of their efforts and scattered around her, succumbed to sleep.
"From the midst of all of them got up Trijata, saying, 'You eat me if you like. Know that Janaka's daughter is a chaste woman and is the daughterinlaw of Dasaratha. She cannot be destroyed'.
'Today I saw in my dream, a dreadful and horripilating scene of destruction of demons and even victory of Sita's husband.
'To protect the demon clan from destruction by Rama, it is enough if we beg her (pardon). Indeed, I think that way.
'Whoever in a sorrowful state sees such kind of dream, would be not only relieved of all sorrows but will experience immense happiness. Janaka's daughter Sita will bless us with protection if we pray her.
'On hearing the words (of Trijata) that 'Rama will succeed', young and bashful Sita felt happy and said that 'If it comes true I will protect thee'.
"Seeing Sita's deplorable state, her illluck and her dread, I began  to worry and had no peace of mind.
"I thought of a strategy to enter into conversation with Janaki that is to praise the Ikshvaku race.
"The divine lady heard my enumeration, sanctifying the royal seers. She replied me, with  her eyes blinded by tears:
"O foremost of vanaras who are you? Why and how have you come here? How did you make friendship with Rama? Tell me all that in detail.
"Hearing her I also said, 'O queen Sugriva, the warrior of fierce valour and king of monkeys developed friendship with your husband'.
'I came here as a servant sent by your tireless husband to find you.
'O glorious lady the tiger among men, the illustrious son of Dasaratha himself sent this ring to you as a taken of identity.
'O venerable lady I seek your order. What should I do? Should I take you to  Rama and Lakshmana? What do you say?
"Having heard all that (Hanuman said) Sita, the delight of Janaka thought over and said, 'Rama should kill Ravana and take me'.
"Then bowing down I saluted the noble and blameless queen Sita to give a signet, which would be very pleasing to Rama.
"Sita then said to me, 'Take this best of gems and present it to the longarmed Rama as a token'.
"Having said so, the noble lady delivered a wonderful jewel with supreme message to me in a sorrowful mood.
"Reminded by her again (that Rama should turn up soon to take her), I offered reverential salutations by circumambulating her.
'O heroic Hanuman narrate in such a way that by hearing you both Rama and Lakshmana will come here soon, accompanied by Sugriva.
'Otherwise with none to protect me, I will live only  for two months.I will die like an orphan and he will not see me'.
"When I heard her pathetic appeal, I was overtaken by anger. I perceived the task left over for me to do.
"Thereafter, I increased my body to the size of a mountain, intent on fighting and started destroying the pleasure garden.
"Those uglyfaced ogresses woke up and saw the devastated garden and terrified beasts and birds.
'O powerful king an evilminded vanara has destroyed the inaccessible pleasure garden not knowing your valour.
'O king may orders be issued to kill this wickedminded vanara wandering aimlessly. He has done contrary to your interest.
"Ravana, lord of the demons having heard (the ogresses) sent invincible ogres called kinkaras who know his mind.
"I killed with an iron bar a battalion of eighty thousand demons who were guarding the garden with tridents and maces.
"Those who were left behind, the less powerful ones went and reported to Ravana that the great army has been killed.
"Then a thought struck my mind. I took hold of a pillar of the tall, decorated mansion of Lanka and killed with it all the hundred demons stationed there.
"With a dreadful iron bar I slayed Jambumali, who was endowed with mighty strength, and was an expert in war and other terrific ogres who accompanied him.
"Ravana, the demon king sent his mighty army of strong footsoldiers, the sons of ministers.
"I sent all of them to the abode of Yama with just an iron bar. Having heard about the death of the less powerful ones, Ravana  sent five heroic army generals.
"Since I killed all of them along with the army, the tenheaded Ravana sent out his mighty son Aksha together with many demons.
"When Mandodari's son, an expert in war had risen up to the sky I caught his feet and whirled him round a hundred times and smashed him.
"When Aksha was done to death, the tenfaced Ravana was enraged and gave instruction to the second son, called Indrajit who was thirsting for war.
"When the army and even the Generals were done to death in combat I was very happy.
"Thinking that Indrajit will surely kill me, the strongarmed mighty Ravana again sent intoxicated demon warriors.
"Realising that I cannot be slain and that his (Indrajit's) power is reduced, he released Brahma's weapon on me with high speed and captured me.
"Then the demons bound me with ropes and brought me to Ravana.
"The wickedminded Ravana, then enquired me why I came to Lanka and why I killed the demons.
'I have done all this for the sake of Sita, O demon king I came to your mansion desiring to see Sita. I am the legitimate son of Windgod. My name is Hanuman.
'I am a vanara, a messenger of Rama and minister of Sugriva.You may know that I have come here to convey the message of Rama to you.
'Highly powerful Sugriva enquires your welfare. He sends beneficial advice to you for your righteousness, pleasures and wellbeing.
'While I was dwelling at the woodedmountain in Rshyamuka, a treaty of friendship was made with Rama, who is skilled in war.
'The king said, ' My wife was abducted by a demon. I request your help by all means to get her'.
'Sugriva told the story of Vali in turn and asked for his help and to make agreement to kill Vali.
With fire as witness the great lord, Rama along with Lakshmana made friendship with Sugriva whose kingdom had been usurped.
'In the combat Rama killed Vali with a single arrow and made Sugriva the king of vanaras.
'We too have to help him in this task. So a message is sent to you on righteous grounds.
'Before the heroic vanaras exterminate your entire army, return Sita at once to Rama.
'Who knows not the power of Vanaras in the past? Even gods had sought their help.
'This I was asked to tell you by the king of vanaras wishing your welfare'. 'Ravana then angrily looked at me as if to burn me.
"The evilminded demon, Ravana, who perpetrates dreadful acts ordered my slaughter, not knowing my power.
"Vibhisana, a very pious brother of the demon king, interceded on my behalf.
"Vibhishana, a tiger among demons, asked Ravana to give up his decision as it was a forbidden course according to the science of royal polity.
'The royal code prohibits the murder of an emissary. A wellwishing emissary should convey the truth.
'O Ravana of immeasurable courage even if the emissary has done any kind of harm he may be mutilated but not murdered. Nowhere do the sastras allow killing (of an ambassador).
'On hearing Vibhishana, Ravana instructed the demons to burn my tail.
"Having heard the king's words, all the demons collected and held my tail, wrapped it with saris of fibres and tattered rags of cotton.
"Many ferociously courageous demons got ready. They bound me and hit me with firesticks and fists. They fastened my tail with ropes and set in on fire.
"The brave demons took me round the city through the royal streets and announced loudly to let every one know that I am bound and that my tail has been set on fire.
"I reduced my form and rid of the bondage. Then again I assumed my original huge form and took up an iron bar lying near and killed all the demons (present).
"Then I leaped to the entrance gate of the city without being perplexed. With my burning tail I set fire to the boundaries and towering mansions which looked like the world at the end of dissolution.
"Lanka has been burnt by me and Sita might have also been burnt. There is no doubt. The great purpose of Rama has been spoilt by me'.
"Thus I was overtaken by sorrow and worry. Just then I heard the wonderful propitious utterances of charanas announcing that Sita was not burnt.
"It was amazing to hear the words of the charanas. On hearing that Jankai had not been burnt, I understood that it is on her account (that he is also not burnt  although his tail was ignited.)
"My tail was burning but I was not burnt by fire. There was joy in my heart. The wind carried sweet fragrance.
"For these two auspicious signs and the highly propitious words uttered by the sages I felt glad at heart.
"Passing along the path of the Windgod, the Moon, the Sun, the siddhas and the gandharvas  I came to see you.
"Everything was favourable to me by the power of Rama, by your goodwill and for the great purpose of Sugriva.
"Let all that could not be done there and still remains to be done, be accomplished by you. I have presented the entire thing".इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyeighth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hanuman, son of the Windgod having narrated in detail all that had happened again started disclosing further details৷৷
"It is due to Rama's exertions, Sugriva's endeavour and Sita's conduct that I have been successful. My devotion to Sita has further deepened.
"Ravana is a great soul because, even though he has done harm to her, he is not killed. This is so because Sita being a chaste woman of good conduct and deep devotion towards her husband (she refrained from killing Ravana as she wanted her husband to do that.)
"Sita can burn Ravana with the mere touch of her body but because of the power of his penance, he was not burnt even though he touched her hand. If enraged, Janaki can burn the whole world (by virtue of her chastity) in a way that even the flame of fire can not do. (But she desired that her husband should kill him.)
"When strong, wise and accomplished persons are there with me desiring victory  why speak again?
"I can also kill all the army,  his followers, sons and brothers of Ravana in war.
"Even if the missiles used by Indrajit are Brahmastra, Indrastra, Rudrastra, Vayavastra, Varunastra which are difficult to see. I will destroy them in war and kill them.
Now if I am permitted, I shall repulse them and destroy them with my valour. A  ceaseless shower of rocks sent forth by me in war is enough to destroy even gods what to say about the nightrangers?
"The ocean may exceed its limits, the mountain Mandara may be shaken from its position but  no hostile army can move Jambavan in war.
"Even the mountain Mandara would be shattered by great Panasa or Nila by the speed of their thighs. What to say in a battle against ogres?
"Who among gods, yakshas, gandharvas, nagas and birds can contend Mainda or Dvivida in battle?Tell me.
"The (two) sons of Aswini are outstanding and foremost fighters and proud of waging war. Who can oppose them? I do not see any one.
"By virtue of the boons received from Brahma, they are very proud. They have also consumed nectar of immortality and are foremost among vanaras.
"Earlier Brahma, the grandsire of all worlds has given the Aswini sons immeasurable invulnerability to honour them.
"The heroic monkeys, proud of their boons became intoxicated it and slaughtered vast army and drank the nectar of immortality.
"If these two become angry they have the power to destroy Lanka, the cavalry, chariots and also the elephants even if the vanaras stay away.
"I have burnt Lanka and have made my name popular even on the highways.
"Mighty Rama and Lakshmana and King Sugriva protected by Rama are renowned for their valour. I am Hanuman, son of the Windgod, a servant of Rama. This I announced.
"In the wicked, Ravana's Ashoka garden under the Simsupa tree the noble lady Sita surrounded by ogresses, is sitting, tormented by tears. Her brightness is like the Moon's, veiled by flakes of clouds. She does not care for Ravana's glory. She is brooding over Rama only.
"Chaste Sita of beautiful hips, an auspicious lady though bound is wholly devoted to Rama alone like Sachi, the wife of Indra who was bound by Nahusha.
"Wearing the same single cloth which she had worn before, filled with dust, Sita remained sorrowful and piteous wishing her husband's welfare.
"I saw Sita often threatened by uglylooking ogresses. Wearing a single braid, she looked pathetic, thinking always about her husband, lying on the bare ground. She was like a lustreless lotus in winter. Spurning the advances by Ravana, she is rather determined to commit suicide.
"I created a little confidence in the fawneyed lady by pacifying her and explaining her with great difficulty the alliance of Rama and Sugriva on hearing which she became happy.
"To Rama, killing Ravana is easy (since Ravana's power of penance has already declined by his abduction of Sita). Separated from her husband she is naturally emaciated. She has become slender just like a student on the new Moon day (on the first day of study).
"Noble Sita is absorbed in grief. Let us do all that has to be done now."इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकोनषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyninth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
After hearing Hanuman,  Vali's son said" O vanaras (Hanuman) having seen Sita it is not proper on our part to go without Sita to the great soul Rama.
"O vanaras, you are known for your valour. I think, to tell Rama that we have seen Sita but not brought her is not proper".
"O noble vanaras Indeed either among gods or among demons there is none who can match the vanaras in leaping and exhibiting valour.
"Hence, having killed the heroes among ogres what other task has Hanuman to do? Let us get Sita.
"Jambavan, the noble vanara, skilled in the execution of tasks thus commanded in a determined manner:
"O prince what you think is  acceptable to us also. Even though we are capable of achieving, knowing what is in Rama's mind, we should act only according to his command to accomplish the task.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtieth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramyana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
In the midst of all the leaders of the monkeys including Angada, Hanuman accepted Jambavan's advice.
Thereafter led by Hanuman, all the vanaras left Mahendra mountain and marched very happily. The vanaras were strong and huge like elephants and resembled mountain Meru. Moreover when they leaped up they seemed to cover the sky (so it was difficult to tell their numbers). Since Hanuman had accomplished the task, the vanaras were praising his strength, his swiftness and courage. They were looking at Hanuman without blinking their eyes, and seemed as though they were carrying him by their eyes. They were determined in their minds to please Rama. Remaining in a state of offering themselves, some of them more accomplished than others, collected together eager to wage war and talking pleasantly among themselves having resolved to assist Rama.
"The monkeys leaped into the sky and entered the garden that resembled the garden of Indra filled with trees and creepers.
The Madhuvanam of Sugriva was wellprotected  and was difficult to access for the vanaras. It was enchating to all beings.
Dadhimukha, the foremost of all monkeys, of great valour and the maternal uncle of Sugriva was the caretaker of  the garden.
On reaching the vanara king's extensive, delightful garden all the vanaras highly rejoiced.
The honeycoloured monkeys felt happy on seeing the Madhuvanam and sought Angada's permission to drink honey.
Young Angada asked old Jambavan's permission for the vanaras to drink honey and Jambavan permitted them.
Permitted thus to drink honey the forestdwelling monkeys were motivated. They rejoiced very happily and started dancing.
Some sang, some prostrated on the ground, some danced, while some laughed, some jumped from the tree, some roamed about and some jumped up and down.
While some supported one another, some held each other, some exchanged secrets with one another, some entertained one another.
While some ran from one tree to another, some jumped down from broken branches, and some swiftfooted ones fell down from the top of trees.
While one was singing, others approached him laughing while some were laughing others fell on them laughing excessively. While some were roaring, others went pushing them down. While some were encouraged to do something others shouted at them.
The army of monkeys had lost control over their bodies due to drinking of honeywine. Not even one was quietly seated there. Not even one was not intoxicated. Not only that, none were satisfied.
Beholding the destruction wrought by the vanaras to the garden, trees, leaves and flowers, and having drunk all the honey, Dadhimukha angrily asked them to stop and get out.
The elderly Dadhimukha who was the powerful protector of the garden reprimanded them and devised yet again a plan to protect it.
He spoke harshly to some, to others he asked not to talk, some he slapped on the hind part with the palm of his hand. To some he spoke pleasantly and with some he quarrelled. And to others he spoke in a conciliatory manner.
In their drunkenness they were using abusive language and with their strength they retaliated without fear. They invaded without considering their mistakes. They caught hold of Dadhimukha and pulled him.
In their drunkenness some monkeys scratched Dadhimukha violently with their nails, some bit him with their teeth and others slapped and kicked him with their palms and legs.Getting together they looted the garden completely.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकषष्टितम स्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfirst sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Hanuman, the foremost of the monkeys, bull among vanaras said, 'Enjoy the honey devoid of any fear. I shall prevent those who object to your action'.
Pleased with Hanuman's words, the distinguished Angada permitted the monkeys to drink.
Even if Hanuman, the achiever, forbids me to do something, I will do it. And now when he has permitted you, why hesitate ?
Having heard the words that came from Angada's mouth, the bulls among vanaras praised him for his generous approval.
The vanaras praised Angada, the bull among vanaras and went to Madhuvanam swiftly like a fastflowing river going to uproot a tree.
Overjoyed at the news of Mythili, being seen, the vanaras entered Madhuvanam and attacked the guards violently, drank the honey and ate the tasty fruits.
All the vanaras collected together, entered the Madhuvanam and attacked in many ways the guards protecting  the  garden.
All of them now gathered at one place and drank honey from large containers. Others were busy preventing the guards.
The honeycoloured monkeys drank honey. Some threw large chunks of honey combs after drinking and some went about intoxicated.
Some took branches of trees and rested at the root of trees. Some totally languid lay down spreading leaves due to drinking of sweet drinks.
Intoxicated with drink, some behaved like mad people, some pushed others senselessly and some were unsteady and shaky.
Some roared, some warbled happily, some felt drowsy, drinking honey and some dropped off to sleep on the ground.
Some made others laugh, some provoked others and some thought of doing something else having got over the intoxication.
All the guards engaged in protecting the garden were driven away in all directions by the fierce vanaras.
Some were dragged on their knees and tossed up. Some monkeys exhibited their private parts, showing indecent behaviour. Dadhimukha, highly disturbed at this, said:
Permitted by Hanuman (to enter Madhuvanam and drink), they dragged one another forcefully tossed up  on their knees showing their private parts.
Then Dadhimukha, the guardian of the garden became furious on the vanaras. Having heard from the guards that the garden was destroyed, he said soothing words to them.
"Come, we will all go there to Madhuvanam and prevent forcibly the vanaras who have consumed honey proud of their power.
"The heroes, bulls among vanaras, heard Dadhimukha and quickly entered Madhuvanam along with him.
On the way, the energetic Dadhimukha took up a tree and ran to the leaping vanaras swiftly with guards following him.
The furious vanara guards lifted rocks, trees and even mountains and went behind Dadhimukha the elephant among the vanaras.
The heroic vanaras held Sala and Tala trees and rushed at once keeping their leader's words in mind.
Then the heroic guards in their thousands fell on the vanaras proud of their power on and under the tala trees.
Having seen the fury of Dadhimukha, Hanuman the leader of the vanaras went to him swiftly.
Seeing the revered, powerful and strongarmed Dadhimukha rushing to him, the angry Angada caught him with both hands tightly.
"Blinded by arrogance, the prince pushed him (Dadhimukha) on the floor forcibly,  forgetting that he was his revered granduncle.
The heroic Dadhimukha, an elephant among monkeys, with his shoulders and arms broken, and body drenched in blood lost his consciousness instantly.
At once Dadhimukha, the maternal uncle of the king became conscious and chased with a stick the intoxicated vanaras.
Escaping from the vanaras with great difficulty, Dadhimukha,  a bull among monkeys, repaired to a secluded place and said to his servants:
"Let them stay here. Our broadnecked king Sugriva will be there with Rama. Let us go to him.
'Madhuvan has come down to us from our forefather's time. Dear to the king, its entry is prohibited even to the gods.
'Sugriva will chase all the vanaras and their friends greedy for honey. They will be punished with a stick. They are doomed'.
'Indeed those evilminded ones who have disobeyed the king's order deserve to be killed.That way our fury and forbearance will result in success'.
Powerful Dadhimukha having said that to the guardians of the garden rose up to the sky and went off with them.
In a moment, Dadhimukha reached the place where wise Sugriva, the son of Sungod was there
Seeing Rama, Lakshmana and also Sugriva from the sky he landed on an even ground.
Dadhimukha, a great hero and king of the guards protecting Madhuvanam surrounded by his servants, with a sad expression on his face offered painful obeisance with folded hands bowing down his forehead at the feet of Sugriva. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्विषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtysecond sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Feeling anxious on seeing Dadhimukha touching his feet with his forehead, Sugriva, the bull among vanaras said:
"O heroic Dadhimukha, get up. Tell me why you have fallen at my feet. I give you protection from all.
When great Sugriva gave assurance to wise Dadhimukha, he got up and said:
"O king in your time or even before, during the time of Vali, that (Madhuvanam) was forbidden for entry. Now it has been laid waste by the trespassing vanaras.
"Even though the garden guards forcibly tried to prevent them they did not care and have devoured all the honey.
"Some have thrown off the leftovers, when others were prevented from drinking off the honey, they raised their eyebrows (to show their grouch).
"When the guards asked the vanaras to leave the garden the enraged vanaras misbehaved with them.
"O Sugriva the vanara guards were chased away by the many heroic monkeys, angry and redeyed.
"Some were struck with hands, some beaten on their knees and were dragged as they liked and showed up their private parts.
These heroes struck that way devoured the Madhuvanam on the earth at their will and devoured the honey even when you are there as king.
While Dadhimukha appealed thus to wise Sugriva, Lakshmana the killer of enemies happened to see them and enquired:
"O king why has this protector of the garden come here? Why is he sad? What is he narrating, asked Lakshmana.
Great prince Lakshmana thus said, Sugriva the proficient speaker replied:
'O venerable Lakshmana Dadhimukha as complaining that the fruits and honey have been consumed by the vanara heroes, Angada and others who have come after their search for Sita in the southern direction.
"Those vanaras having entered Madhuvanam and broken the trees are quite right. Had they not accomplished their purpose they would not have indulged themselves that way.
"If they have trespassed into the garden that way, they might have done their duty. No doubt, Hanuman alone among them might have seen Sita.
"Hanuman alone has the ability to do it, the reason being he has the capacity the wisdom, streneous effort, virility and enthusiasm to accomplish it. These attributes are wellestablished in him.
Where Jambavan, Angada and Hanuman are leaders directing the task of the army it must have been accomplished.
"Here is Dadhimukha, a vanara, known for his valour and sweet tongue. He came here this incident to tell.
"O strongarmed Saumitri the Vanaras must have seen Sita. Or else, they would not have arrived to drink honey.
"If the renowned vanaras had not seen Vaidehi, they would not have entered the wonderful garden granted as boon (by Brahma).
"Then righteous Rama and Lakshmana rejoiced to hear the words of Sugriva, which were pleasing to the ears.
Beautifulnecked Sugriva heard Dadhimukha, the protector of the garden, felt very glad and replied:
"They went to the garden to drink only after having performed their duty. I am glad about it. Since they have accomplished the purpose, they are to be excused for their behaviour. I have pardoned them.
"Beholding young Rama and Lakshmana extremely delighted, their eyes filled with joy out of fulfilment of the purpose, Sugriva who was also highly delighted felt an auspicious thrill on his limbs and knew that good time had come.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रिषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtythird sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Pleased with Sugriva's command (to send forth Angada and Hanuman) Dadhimukha offered salutations to Sugriva, Rama  and Lakshmana.
Dadhimukha offered his obeisance to Sugriva and the mighty Rama and Lakshmana  and rose up to the sky followed by the vanaras.
Descending into Madhuvanam, Dadhimukha saw all the monkey troops free from intoxication (of honeywine).
Heroic Dadhimukha went to Angada, holding his cupped palms reverentially and spoke these conciliatory words with joy:
"O handsome one, do not react harshly at these guards who have obstructed your companions out of ignorance and fury.
"O mighty Angada you are heir apparent and also king. Out of foolishness I obstructed you. You ought to pardon me this mistake.
"O blameless prince I have already told your father's elder brother and all the forestdwellers about your arrival here.
"He was not angry at your destruction of the garden. On the other hand, he was very glad to hear about your arrival.
"Your father's brother, Sugriva, the lord of vanaras felt very glad and indeed asked me to send you quickly."
At these good words from Dadhimukha, Angada, the monkey leader, an eloquent speaker said this:.
"O scorcher of enemies I presume Rama has already heard the news of our arrival on accomplishment of the task. Hence it is not proper for us to tarry here.
"The vanaras of the forest have taken rest after drinking as much honey as they desired. What is left here to do? We have to go wherever Sugriva is."
Angada said to the vanara troops assembled, "Tell me what we have to do. I shall act as you wish.
"Even though I am heir apparent, it is not proper for me to order you.You have accomplished the purpose and to command you is not befitting on my part."
On hearing Angada's valuable words said in that way, the vanaras repled:
"O king O bull among monkeys we think you are an exception to those to whom prosperity brings arrogance.
"You alone could speak such words. Your humility speaks of your fitness for a  bright future.
"O Angada the best of vanaras without your command none will find it possible to put forward even a single step."
Thus addressed by all the vanaras, Angada said 'Well, let us go'. Then the powerful vanaras rose up the sky.
All the vanara troops sprang up into the air as though there was no sky, like stones shattered by machines from the  mountains rise up.
The swift monkeys roared aloud as though they went up the sky like thundering clouds driven by  the wind.
Seeing the griefstricken, lotuseyed Rama, the lord of the vanaras Sugriva said this before the arrival of Angada:
"Trust me, Rama. Be blessed. The vanaras have seen the divine lady. There is no doubt. It is not possible for them to come here after exceeding the time limit  (in their search for Sita).
"My heir apparent, the strongarmed Angada, and the best of the monkeys is endowed with virtues. He would not come near me if his mission had failed.
"In case the vanaras have returned without accomplishing the task, Angada would have assumed a pathetic face, perplexed and unsteady in mind.
"If Angada, lord of the vanaras had not been happy, he would not have destroyed the Madhuvanam of my father's and my grandfather's time. O Rama, follower of righteous practices, Kausalya has an excellent son in you. Trust me.
"Hanuman is the one who has accomplished this task. Who else can? No doubt, he has seen Sita.
"O Rama, the best among the wise just like the luminosity that abides in the Sun, capacity to succeed, energy, intelligence, even courage and steadfastness reside in Hanuman.
"Where Jambavan is the leader, Angada the commander of the army and Hanuman the guiding force, the end result will not be otherwise.
"You are extremely valiant and it is unbecoming of you to be anxious at this time Rama. Just then chatterings of the monkeys were heard from the sky as they roared in pride talking of Hanuman's achievement. Having successfully completed the errand, they have arrived at Kishkinda.
The great Sugriva heard the roar of the monkeys and was extremely happy. He kept raising and shaking his long tail in joy.
The joyful monkeys with Angada and Hanuman leading them descended with eagerness to have a close look at Rama.
Angada the chief along with the heroic monkeys very joyfully and exuberantly descended close to Sugriva, the king of monkeys and Rama.
Then the strongarmed Hanuman with his head bowed down offered salutations and reported, 'Divine lady Sita with her constant devotion to Sri Rama is sound in body'.
On hearing the nectarlike words from Hanuman that Sita was found, Rama and Lakshmana were delighted.
Sugriva and Lakshmana glanced at Hanuman respectfully with affection thinking surely Hanuman alone has succeeded.
Thereafter the vanaras arrived at the Prasrvana mount, with wonderful forests and bowed down to Sri Rama and mighty Lakshaman and Sugriva placing their leader, heir apparent in front. Then they began telling the story of Sita and her state.
The monkeys in Rama's presence narrated all about Sita's detention in Ravana's Ashoka garden, the ogresses threatening her and the time limit fixed by Ravana (for her survival).
Hearing of Sita alive and not harmed, Rama asked the vanaras, 'How is Sita? How is she disposed to me? Tell me everything'.
On hearing the words from Rama, the vanaras requested Hanuman who was aware of  Sita's position to tell Rama all about her.
The son of the Wind god, Hanuman who was wise in speech heard the words of Rama, offered salutations to Sita in the direction in which she was located and narrated the story about her discovery.
"Having crossed the sea consisting of a hundred yojanas in quest of Vaidehi, I found her.
"On the southern shore of the ocean is situated the city of Lanka , ruled by the evilminded Ravana.
"There in the inner palace of Ravana, I saw your lovely wife Sita, with all her hopes pinned on you, giving up all other desires.
"I found her in the beautiful garden guarded by hideous ogresses threatening her again and again৷৷
"Sita, who did not deserve and yet was full of grief was detained by Ravana in his inner palace, guarded by ogresses. She had single braid (a sign of desolation), was pathetic,  and totally absorbed in your thought. She was lying on bare ground with her limbs turned pale, like lotus in winter. She was averse to Ravana and was determined to commit suicide. She has only Rama in her mind. Somehow I found her.
"O sinless one O tiger among men To inspire confidence in her I praised the glory of your Ikshvaku dynasty.
"When the divine lady talked to me, I presented all the facts about the alliance of Rama and Sugriva. On hearing me, virtuous Sita, whose devotion is fixed on you became delighted.
"O bull among men I saw Janaki,the delight of Janaka, a formidable lady filled with devotion to you and richly endowed with austerity.
"O wise one, with your ring given her, she told me an anecdote of a crow that took place at Chitrakuta.
(She said)'O son of the Windgod you should let Rama, the tiger among men know all that you have seen here.
'Within hearing of Sugriva, tell him about your efforts. Present this(signet) to Rama carefully preserved by me.
'This auspicious (jewel) Chudamani has been preserved by me very carefully. Remind him of the decorative red mark he painted with a stone pigment on my forehead, indeed, it is proper to remind him of this.
'O sinless one tell Rama that this auspicious Chudamani born in the ocean is sent to him and I was gazing at it as if it was him (Rama) and feeling happy.
'O Son of Dasaratha I will hold on to life for a month. Captured by the demons, I will not live for more than a month'.
"With her limbs emaciated through austerities detained in Ravana's inner palace, eyes wide open in fear, Sita said this to me:
"O Rama I have spoken everything that has happened. We have to pay attention to the means of crossing the ocean."
Coming to know that the two princes were sighing in relief, Hanuman presented the token of identification given by Sita to Rama, after having communicated in full the messsage of Sita in an orderly manner.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfifth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Thus addressed by Hanuman, Rama held the token (Chudamani) against his bosom and wept with Lakshmana.
Seeing the precious jewel, Rama's eyes were filled with tears. Overwhelmed with grief, he spoke to Sugriva.
"Just as a cow fond of its calf begins to distil milk from its teats at the sight of the calf, so does my heart melt at the sight of this excellent jewel.
"This was found in water and was bestowed by Indra out of great joy on Janaka who had performed a grand sacrificial ceremony. So it was worshipped by elders of the family.
"O noble Sugriva now when I see this excellent jewel, I get direct sight of my father and king of Videha (in the same way as I obtained the sight of Sita).
"This jewel was shining on the head of my beloved. Now its mere look makes me feel that I am seeing her.
"O handsome Hanuman Sita is like water for a thirsty person. Tell me again and again what Sita said to you. Sprinkle on me (lifegiving) water of her words in the form of message.
"O Saumitri I see this jewel born (formed) under water but not her. What can be more sorrowful to me?
"Take me to the place you saw my beloved. Knowing where she is I cannot stay here even for a moment.
"She is always very timid. How can my fairhipped beloved remain in the midst of dreadful and fearsome demons?
"Her face resembling the autumnal Moon bereft of its stain, though covered with rainclouds does not shine so bright.
"O Hanuman Tell me now truly what has been told by her. I am eager to know. Indeed, it will keep me alive just as medicne does. (I shall survive on the strength of her message)
That lovely Sita who speaks sweetly, that fairhipped beautiful one who has been separated from me, my beloved, what did she say? Please narrate.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षट्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtysixth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
Thus asked by Sri Rama, Hanuman repeated everything spoken by Sita to Rama.
"O bull among men queen Janaki related to me as a token of identification an incident  that had taken place at Chitrakuta in the past.
"When she was lying on your lap happily she awoke early and a crow came swiftly and scratched on her breast.
"O Bharata's brother, when Sita awoke from sleep you slept on her lap. The same crow again hurt her.
"O scorcher of enemies pained by the crow hurting her repeatedly, while you were sleeping happily, she woke you up and informed you about it.
"Seeing the blood flowing from her breasts you became furious like a hissing serpent and said:
"You are of timid nature. Who has scratched your breasts with the tip of the nail? Who is sporting with an enraged fivehooded serpent"?
'Seeing all over, at once I glanced at the crow that stood in front of her with sharp bloodstained nails'.
'That crow, the foremost of the birds was the son of Indra moving about all over the earth swiftly. His speed matched the Windgod's.
'O longarmed, wise and revered Rama, then in anguish you took a cruel decision'.
'You took out a blade of grass from your mat and chanted the mantra to invoke the weapon of Brahma (Brahmastra) and hurled it on the crow. It blazed like the fire of the doom's day.
'You hurled the blazing blade of grass on to the crow. That burning blade of grass chased the crow.
'He was abandoned by his father, even by great sages and gods. Then he went round the three worlds but could not find a saviour.
'O destroyer of enemies the crow came back again to you trembling seeking protection from you and fell on the ground. Even though it deserved to be slayed, you saved him out of compassion.
'O Rama since a divine weapon cannot be withdrawn, it did strike his right eye'.
'Thereafter that crow left without killing offered salutations to you and king Dasaratha and returned to his abode.
'You are efficient, foremost among wielders of weapons, truthful and powerful. Why are you not directing weapons against the demons?
'It is not possible for nagas, gandharvas, even asuras or Marutas to confront Rama in war.
'If you have any anxiety about me, you will certainly slay Ravana in the battle immediately with your sharp arrows'.
'For what reason is the the scorcher of enemies, Lakshmana, the best of men also does not protect me at the behest of Rama, his brother?
'Why are the two tigers among men whose power is like that of wind and fire and who are unassailable even to suras are neglecting me?
'Have I done any great sin because of which even though both the scorchers of enemies are capable, they are not doing so?'
"On hearing Vaidehi's piteous words, I once again said this to the noble lady:
'O divine lady I swear to you on my truthfulness, that out of grief for you Rama is not interested in anything else and Lakshmana is deeply afflicted because Rama is overhelmed with grief.
'O lovely lady somehow I could discover you. This is not the moment for lamentation.Your grief will end.
'The two princes, tigers among men are blameles. They are anxious to see you. They will reduce this Lanka into ashes.
'O fairhipped lady Rama will slay fearsome Ravana and all his relatives and take you to his city. It is certain.
'O blameless lady you should give me that which he would be glad to recognise as a token.'
"O mighty Rama, she glanced at all directions and untied the end of her garment  in which she had this best jewel worn on her hair preserved and gave it to me.
"O foremost among the Raghus I took that wonderful gem for your sake from the noble lady and offered her salutations, bowing my head, and returned quickly৷৷
"Seeing me eager to depart and growing in size, the loving daughter of Janaka said.
"She was dejected. Her face was filled with tears. Despondent at my departure, she shed tears profusely and said:
'Hanuman tell both Rama and Lakshman who are like two lions, Sugriva and his ministers about my welfare.
'You may go and tell mighty Rama to make arrangements to relieve me from this ocean of sorrow.
'O foremost among the heroic monkeys approaching Rama, you should tell him the intensity of my sorrow and the threatening of the shedemons. Let your journey be speedy and auspicious.'
"O lion among kings noble Sita has spoken these words in grief: 'Make him know all this and tell him that Sita is faithful and safe in all respects.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyseventh sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
"O tiger among men In view of her regards for me and and her love for you she was confident and once again addressed me:
'You may appeal to Rama, the son of Dasaratha in many ways, that he should come quickly and slay Ravana in the battle and get me back.
'O crusher of enemies O brave Hanuman I wish you rest for a while in a secluded place around here and leave tomorrow .
'O valiant (Hanuman) by your presence here, the less fortunate me, will be relieved of sorrow for a while.
'O courageous tiger among monkeys when you depart (abruptly) I doubt if I would be alive by your return.
'I am an unfortunate one, afflicted by sorrow and tormented (by demons). If I am not able to see you I will be lamenting in grief.
'O brave vanaras I have great doubts about your assistants the vanaras and bears, crossing the ocean.
'How will the vanaras and bears cross this great, impassable ocean? How will the princes Rama and Lakshmna be able to cross it?
'Only three among all beings, Garuda, the Windgod and you have the capacity to cross the ocean.
'O heroic Hanuman you know how to succeed. But I wish to know what expedient you have to accomplish which is difficult by all means. O foremost vanara, please tell me .
'O Slayer of enemy heroes you have the ability to accomplsh this task singlehanded. By succeeding in accomplishing the objective you will become renowned (and not Rama).
'When Rama slays Ravana and his entire army and takes me to his city after becoming victorious it will add glory to him.
'Tell valiant Rama not to take me back the way Ravana, the demon abducted me out of fear. Which is not right.
'If Rama, the slayer of the enemy army, could fill Lanka with his arrows and take me that will be a good sight for him to see.
'You may make arrangement in such a way that the exalted hero Rama exhibits his might according to his stature'.
"Hearing the meaningful, courteous and reasonable words of Sita, I replied :
'O queen The lord of the army of bears and vanaras who is the foremost among the monkeys is endowed with enough strength and has resolved to rescue you.
'Mighty, powerful and tough monkeys who have the speed of thought are under the command of Sugriva.
'O great lady the mighty vanaras of extraordinary strength can fly with the wind and have  even circumambulated the earth.
'There are monkeys who are more powerful than me or equal to me. None are less strong than me or Sugriva.
'When I could come here, what to speak of the mightier monkeys?, People do not send the superior ones on errand, but send only the juniors.
'O noble lady give up your lamentation. Enough of sorrowing. The vanara army will fly and reach this place at one leap and fill it.
'O noble lady the lions among men, Rama and Lakshmana who resemble Sun and Moon will ascend on my back and reach here.
'You will see the lionlike Rama, a slayer of enemies and Lakshmana wielding bow in hand standing at the entrance of Lanka very soon.
'You will hear before long the shouts of generals of the vanaras who resemble rainclouds on the mountain roaring like lions from the Malaya mountain of Lanka.
'You will soon see Rama, the slayer of enemies crowned as king of Ayodhya with you, having duly completed the term of  exile in the forest'.
"Sita though afflicted heard from me that you were also in excessive grief on account of separation from her and from my soothing, auspicious and welcome words, she derived comfort and remained quiet"৷৷इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyeighth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
